
--- Page 2 ---
SBC 303 
2007 
 
 
 
 
 
SAUDI BUILDING CODE 
 
First Edition: January 2007 
 
 
SAUDI BUILDING CODE NATIONAL COMMITTEE. 
 
 
 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this code may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without 
written permission of the Saudi Building Code National Committee. 
 
 
 
ISBN: 9960-9885-2-X 
 
  
 
 
 
General Secretariat of the Saudi Building Code National Committee  
www.sbcnc.gov.sa 
 
 
 
 
PRINTED IN SAUDI ARABIA 
 


--- Page 3 ---
THANKS PAGE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gratitude 
 
In appreciation and gratitude to The Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques and Prime Minister 
 
King Abdullah Bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud 
And to the Crown Prince, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Defence and Aviation and 
Inspector General  
 
Prince Sultan Bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud 
For their continuous support and gracious consideration, 
The Saudi Building Code National Committee is honored to present the first issue of  
The Saudi Building Code (SBC). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 4 ---
THANKS PAGE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 5 ---
SBC 303 
2007 
 
 
 
 
Saudi Building Code Requirements 
 
 
 
 
201 
Architectural  
 
 
 
 
301 
Structural – Loading and Forces 
 
 
 
 
302 
Structural – Testing and Inspection 
 
 
 
 
303 Structural – Soil and Foundations 
 
 
 
 
304 
Structural – Concrete Structures  
 
 
 
 
305 
Structural – Masonry Structures  
 
 
 
 
306 
Structural – Steel Structures  
 
 
 
 
401 
Electrical  
 
 
 
 
501 
Mechanical  
 
 
 
601 
Energy Conservation 
 
 
 
 
701 
Sanitary  
 
 
 
 
801 
Fire Protection  
 
 
 
 
901 
Existing Buildings  
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 6 ---
PREFACE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Preface/1 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
The Saudi Building Code is a set of legal, administrative and technical systems that 
establish building construction in the Kingdom on scientific and engineering bases with the 
aim of ensuring the minimum requirements of safety and public health.  It started with the 
issuance of the Royal Decree No. 7/B/3230 dated 11th June 2000 so as to form a national 
committee composed of representatives of Saudi universities and the governmental and 
private sectors.  In the beginning of September 2001, the Council of Ministers approved the 
general plan of the National Committee to prepare a unified building code for the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia.  
 
To choose a reference code on which a Saudi Building Code is to be based, a number 
of Arab and International experiences, building standards, regulations and plans of the 
governmental departments and authorities have been studied. The National Committee has 
also been acquainted with the results of the national researches and the international codes, 
such as the regulations of the International Code Council (ICC) issued in U.S.A., European 
Code (EC), Arab Codes, the Canadian Building Code (NBC). It has also sought the opinions 
of specialists in relevant Saudi universities, governmental and private sectors through holding 
a questionnaire, a symposium and specialized workshops, in the light of which, (ICC) has 
been chosen.  It has also endorsed the use of the International Electrotechnical Commission 
(IEC) in respect of the electrotechnical regulations and requirements, the codes of the 
American Concrete Institute (ACI) for concrete and masonry structures, the American Society 
of Civil Engineers (ASCE) for loading and forces and the American Institute of Steel 
Construction (AISC) for steel structures. 
 
Toward expanding the participation of all the specialists in the building and 
construction industry in the Kingdom through the governmental and private sectors, the 
universities and research centers, the National Committee took its own decisions related to 
code content by holding specialized meetings, symposiums and workshops and by the help of 
experts from inside and outside of Saudi Arabia. 
          The technical committees and sub-committees started their work in the beginning of 
April 2003 to prepare the general framework of the Saudi Building Code that adapts the base 
code with the social and cultural environment, the natural and climatic conditions, types of 
soil and properties of materials in the Kingdom. It was approved by the Council of Ministers 
Decree No. 279 dated 19 December 2004. Then, the technical committees and the sub-
committees started preparing the technical requirements for the code. 
The Saudi Building Code Structural Requirements for Soil and Foundations (SBC 
303) were developed based on Chapter 18 of the International Building Code (IBC) 2003 
edition published by ICC, and a number of national and international documents. International 
Code Council (ICC) grants permission to the SBCNC to include all or portions of ICC codes 
and standards in the SBC, and ICC is not responsible or liable in any way to SBCNC or to any 
other party or entity for any modifications or changes that SBCNC makes to such documents. 
The development of the SBC 303 followed the methodology that was approved by the Saudi 
Building Code National Committee. Modifications to the IBC documents were intended to 
draft a comprehensive set of provisions that are consistent with and inclusive of Chapter 18 of 
the IBC, and in the meantime accounts, to the best possible extent, for materials, 
environmental conditions, and construction practices prevailing in the Kingdom.  
Throughout the development of the document, several key aspects were considered, 
among them are the current local practice of geotechnical engineering and the causes related 
to soil and foundations problems.  
            Most topics of the IBC documents have been substantially revised and modified 
except pile and pier foundations which are viewed in detail in the original document and they 
were approved without modifications. The main revisions included parts pertaining to site 
investigation, excavation, grading and backfill, shallow footings, and damp proofing and 


--- Page 7 ---
PREFACE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Preface/2 
 
waterproofing. A glossary of relevant terms has been included in Chapter 1, and a number of 
regulations scattered throughout the IBC document have been revised to reflect the local 
practice.  
           Some sections in the IBC have been extended to become entire new chapters in the 
SBC 303, as for the case of retaining walls, design for expansive soil, and design for vibratory 
loads. Particularly, design for expansive soil has been thoroughly enhanced with the additions 
of foundation systems that are common in local construction practice, and by emphasizing 
pre- and post-construction detailing which are usually overlooked and lead to many sequential 
problems. Sabkha and collapsible soils were not covered in the IBC document, yet these two 
soil formations are abundantly found on vast areas throughout the Kingdom and historically 
have created problems for structures. Thus, besides provisions relevant to identification and 
testing of these soil formations, which have been added to Chapter 2 “Site Investigations”, an 
entire chapter has been devoted for each soil type, covering all aspects relevant to design and 
construction of foundations systems on such problematic soil formations.  
          It is noteworthy to point out that out of the seventeen chapters that comprise the SBC 
303 document, six were entirely new and five were substantially revised. The newly-
introduced materials account for almost sixty percent of the SBC 303 document, and 
excluding the pile and pier portion.  This proportion approaches about seventy five percent.  
 Although the provisions presume the existence of certain standard conditions, more often 
than not every project has a unique combination of variables, and for that reason, all attempts 
have been made to make these requirements flexible. 
 


--- Page 8 ---
NATIONAL COMMITTEE 
SBC 303 
2007 
National Committee/1 
 
 
 
The Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Chairman 
Mohammad H. Al-Nagadi, MSc. 
          Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs 
Vice Chairman 
Mohammad S. Al-Haddad, PhD. 
          King Abdul-Aziz City for Science and Technology 
Member 
Nabil A. Molla, MSc. 
          Saudi Arabian Standards Organization 
Member 
Khalid M. Qattan, PhD. 
          Ministry of Interior 
Member 
Abdul-Ghani H. Al-Harbi, BSc. 
          Ministry of Transportation 
Member 
Ahmad A. Al-Yousef, BSc. 
          Ministry of Water and Electricity 
Member 
Tamim A. Samman, PhD. 
          King Abdul-Aziz University 
Member 
Rajeh Z. Al-Zaid, PhD. 
          King Saud University 
Member 
Mustafa Y. Al-Mandil, PhD. 
          King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals 
 
Member 
Tariq M. Nahhas, PhD. 
          Umm Al-Qura University 
Member 
Ali O. Al-Zaid, BSc. 
          Council of Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
 
 
Former Members of the Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Chairman 
1423 up to 1426H 
Khalid Y. Al-Khalaf, PhD. 
          Saudi Arabian Standards Organization 
 
Member 
 
Abdul-Aziz A. Al-Abdul-Karim, BSc. 
          Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs 
 
Member 
Ahmad A. Al-Johdali, BSc. 
          Ministry of Transportation 
 
 


--- Page 9 ---
CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE 
SBC 303 
2007 
Consultative Committee /1 
 
 
The Consultative Committee 
 
 
Chairman 
Ali O. Al-Zaid, BSc. 
               Member of the Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Vice Chairman 
Rajeh Z. Al-Zaid, PhD. 
               Member of the Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Member 
Siraj M. Mas'oudi, MSc. 
             Saudi Arabian Standards Organization 
 
Member 
Mustafa Y. Al-Mandil, PhD. 
               Member of the Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Member 
Ali A. Shash, PhD. 
             Head of the Administrative and Legal Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Abdul-Rahman A. Al-Tassan, PhD. 
               Head of the Architectural Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Ahmad B. Al-Shuraim, PhD. 
               Head of the Structural Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Abdul-Hameed A. Al-Ohaly, PhD. 
               Head of the Electrical Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Ala'uddin Shibl, PhD. 
               Head of the Mechanical Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Ibrahim S. Al-Jadhai, PhD. 
               Head of the Sanitary Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Abdullah I. Al-Boeis, BSc. 
               Head of the Fire Protection Technical Committee 
 
Member 
Tariq A. Al-Khalifa, PhD. 
               Head of the Seismic Requirements Technical Committee 
 
 
 
Secretariat General of the Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Former Secretary  
Mohammad A. Bin-Hussien, PhD. 
               Former Secretary General 
 
Acting Secretary 
Mohammed G. Al-Najrani, BSc. 
               Acting Secretary General 
 
Coordinator 
Fuad A. Bukhari, Arch. 
               Director of Technical Affairs – SBCNC 
 
 
 


--- Page 10 ---
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Technical Committee /1 
 
 
 
 
The Saudi Building Code Structural Technical Committee 
 (SBC-STC) 
 
 Ahmed B. Shuraim, PhD. 
                   King Saud University 
 
Chairman 
 
Hani H. Alnabulsi, BSc. 
                   Ministry of Interior – Directorate of Civil Defence 
 
Member 
 
 
Faisal A. Al-Mashary, PhD. 
                   Ministry of Higher Education 
 
Member 
 
 
Magdy Kamel Moustafa, PhD. 
                   Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs 
 
Member 
 
 
Saleh H. Alsayed , PhD. 
                   King Saud University 
 
Member 
 
 
AbdulAziz I. Al-Negheimish , PhD.  
                     King Saud University 
 
Member 
 
 
Mosleh A. Al-Shamrani, PhD. 
                      King Saud University 
 
Member 
 
 
Yousef A. Al-Salloum, PhD. 
                     King Saud University 
 
Member 
 
 
AbdulSalam A. Alshogeir, PhD. 
                    King Saud University 
 
Member 
 
 
Ahmad O. AlQasabi, PhD. 
                    King Saud University 
 
Member 
 
 
Saeid A. Alghamdi, PhD.  
                King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals 
 
Member 
 
 
Nabeel S. Al-Gahtani, PhD.  
                    Saline Water Conversion Corporation 
 
Member 
 
 
Faisal Omar Binsiddiq, BSc. 
                    Royal Commission of Jubail and Yanbu 
 
Member 
 
 
Khaled M. Al-Sheref, BSc. 
                    Saudi Aramco 
 
Member 
 
 
Mohammed G. Najrani, BSc. 
               Saudi Building Code National Committee 
 
Coordinator 


--- Page 11 ---
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Technical Committee /2 
 
 


--- Page 12 ---
SUB-COMMITTEE
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Sub-Committee/1
 
 
 
 
The Soils and Foundations Technical Sub-Committee  
 
 
Mosleh A. Al-Shamrani, PhD.** 
                King Saud University 
Chairman 
 
 
Mohammed O. Fadl, PhD. 
                Ministry of Education 
Member 
 
 
Talal O. Al-Refeai, PhD. 
                King Saud University 
Member 
 
 
Abdullah I. AL-Mhaidib, PhD.** 
                King Saud University 
Member 
 
 
Awad A. Al-Karni, PhD. 
                King Saud University 
Member 
 
 
Abdulhafiz O. Al-Shenawy, PhD. 
                 King Saud University 
Member 
 
 
Ahmed O. Al-Qasabi, PhD.**  
                 King Saud University 
Member 
 
 
Talat A. Badr, PhD.  
                 King Fahd University of Petroleum and  Minerals 
Member 
 
 
Ali  A. Al-Massmoum, PhD.  
                 Umm Al-Qura University 
Member 
 
 
Abdulaziz A. Alfi, PhD. 
                 Umm Al-Qura University 
Member 
 
 
Mohamed E. Hamdto, PhD.** 
                 Arriyadh Development Authority 
Member 
 
 
Muawia A. Daf'allah, PhD. 
             Nizar Kurdi Consulting Engineers 
Member 
 
 
Fadlo Toma , PhD. 
                 Rashid Geotechnical and Material Engineers 
Member 
** Member of Sub-Committee that prepared and edited this document. 
 
 


--- Page 13 ---
CONTENTS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Contents/1 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
CHAPTER 1:   
GENERAL   
 
1.1 
 
Scope  
 
1.2 
 
Design   
 
 
1.3 
 
Definitions    
 
CHAPTER 2:   
SITE INVESTIGATIONS   
 
2.1 
 
General 
 
 
2.2 
 
Scope  
 
2.3 
 
Soil classification 
 
 
2.4 
 
Investigation   
 
2.5 
 
Soil boring and sampling  
 
 
2.6 
 
Reports  
 
 
CHAPTER 3:   
EXCAVATION, GRADING, AND FILL  
 
3.1 
 
General  
 
 
3.2 
 
Commencement 
 
 
3.3 
 
Excavations near footings or foundations 
 
 
3.4 
 
Slope limits   
 
3.5 
 
Surcharge  
 
 
3.6 
 
Placement of backfill  
 
3.7 
 
Site grading 
 
 
3.8 
 
Grading designation   
 
3.9 
 
Grading and fill in floodways  
 
3.10 
 
Compacted fill material 
 
 
3.11 
 
Controlled low-strength material (CLSM)   
 
CHAPTER 4:  
ALLOWABLE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF SOILS  
 
4.1 
 
Design  
 
4.2 
 
Presumptive load-bearing values 
 
 
4.3 
 
Lateral sliding resistance 
 
 
4.4 
 
Computed load-bearing values 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5:   
SPREAD FOOTINGS 
 
 
5.1 
 
General  
 
 
5.2 
 
Depth of footings 
 
 
5.3 
 
Footings on or adjacent to slopes 
 
 
5.4 
 
Design of footings  
 
 
5.5 
 
Designs employing lateral bearing 
 
 
5.6 
 
Seismic requirements   
 
CHAPTER 6:   
FOUNDATION WALLS 
 
 
6.1 
 
General  
 
6.2 
 
Foundation wall thickness 
 
 
6.3 
 
Foundation wall materials 
 
 
6.4 
 
Alternative foundation wall reinforcement 
 
 
6.5 
 
Hollow masonry walls 
 


--- Page 14 ---
CONTENTS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Contents/2 
 
 
6.6 
 
Seismic requirements  
 
6.7 
 
Foundation wall drainage 
 
 
6.8 
 
Pier and curtain wall foundations 
 
 
6.9 
 
Seismic requirements  
 
CHAPTER 7:   
RETAINING WALLS 
 
 
7.1 
 
General 
 
 
7.2 
 
Lateral earth pressure  
 
7.3 
 
Bearing capacity 
 
 
7.4 
 
Stability 
 
 
7.5 
 
Wall dimensions 
 
 
7.6 
 
Wall construction 
 
 
CHAPTER 8:   
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS 
 
 
8.1 
 
General 
 
 
8.2 
 
Loadings 
 
 
8.3 
 
Concrete 
 
 
8.4 
 
Contact pressure 
 
 
8.5 
 
Settlement 
 
 
8.6 
 
Combined footings 
 
 
8.7 
 
Continuous footings  
 
8.8 
 
Grid foundations 
 
 
8.9 
 
Mat foundations 
 
 
8.10 
 
Seismic requirements  
 
CHAPTER 9:    
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOILS 
 
 
9.1 
 
General 
 
 
9.2 
 
Loadings 
 
 
9.3 
 
Design  
 
9.4 
 
Pre-construction inspections  
 
9.5 
 
Inspection prior to placement of concrete 
 
 
9.6 
 
Concrete 
 
 
CHAPTER 10:    
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
 
 
10.1 
 
General 
 
 
10.2 
 
Loadings 
 
 
10.3 
Design  
 
10.4 
 
Inspections 
 
 
10.5 
 
Concrete 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: 
 DESIGN FOR SABKHA SOILS         
 
 
11.1 
 
General 
 
 
11.2 
 
Loadings 
 
 
11.3 
 
Design  
 
11.4 
 
Required preventive measures 
 
 
11.5 
 
Concrete 
 
 
11.6 
 
Removal of sabkha soils 
 
 
11.7 
 
Stabilization  


--- Page 15 ---
CONTENTS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Contents/3 
 
 
CHAPTER 12:   
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS         
 
 
12.1 
 
General 
 
12.2 
 
Loads and forces 
 
 
12.3 
 
Soil bearing pressures, pile capacities and settlements 
 
12.4 
 
Design requirements  
 
 
CHAPTER 13: 
 DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING 
 
 
13.1 
 
Where required 
 
13.2 
 
Dampproofing required 
 
 
13.3 
 
Waterproofing required 
 
 
13.4 
 
Subsoil drainage system 
 
 
13.5 
 
Underground water-retention structures 
 
 
CHAPTER 14:   
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE 
FOUNDATIONS 
 
 
14.1 
 
Design  
 
14.2 
 
General 
 
 
14.3 
 
Special types of piles  
 
14.4 
 
Pile caps   
 
 
14.5 
 
Stability 
 
 
14.6 
 
Structural integrity 
 
 
14.7 
 
Splices  
 
14.8 
 
Allowable pier or pile loads  
 
14.9 
 
Lateral support 
 
 
14.10  
Use of higher allowable pier or pile stresses  
 
14.11  
Piles in subsiding and calcareous areas 
 
 
14.12  
Settlement analysis 
 
 
14.13  
Preexcavation  
 
14.14  
Installation sequence  
 
14.15  
Use of vibratory drivers 
 
 
14.16  
Pile drivability 
 
14.17  
Protection of pile materials 
 
 
14.18  
Use of existing piers or piles  
 
14.19  
Heaved piles  
 
14.20  
Identification  
 
14.21  
Pier or pile location plan 
 
 
14.22  
Special inspection 
 
 
14.23  
Seismic design of piers or piles 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 15:     
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS  
 
15.1 
 
Precast concrete piles  
 
15.2 
 
Structural steel piles  
 
  
CHAPTER 16:    CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
 
16.1 
 
General 
 
 
16.2 
 
Enlarged base piles 
 
 
16.3 
 
Drilled or augered uncased piles 
 


--- Page 16 ---
CONTENTS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
Contents/4 
 
 
16.4 
 
Driven uncased piles  
 
16.5 
 
Steel-cased piles 
 
 
16.6 
 
Concrete-filled steel pipe and tube piles 
 
 
16.7 
 
Caisson piles  
 
16.8 
 
Composite piles 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 17:  
PIER FOUNDATIONS                       
 
 
17.1 
 
General 
 
 
17.2 
 
Lateral dimensions and height 
 
 
17.3 
 
Materials 
 
 
17.4 
 
Reinforcement 
 
17.5 
 
Concrete placement  
 
17.6 
 
Belled bottom  
 
17.7 
 
Masonry 
 
 
17.8 
 
Concrete 
 
 
17.9 
 
Steel shell 
 
 
17.10  
Dewatering 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
INDEX                     
 


--- Page 17 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
GENERAL 
 
SECTION 1.1 
SCOPE 
 
1.1.0 
The Saudi Building Code for Soils and foundations referred to as SBC 303, 
provides minimum requirements for footing and foundation systems in those areas 
not subject to scour or water pressure by wind and wave action. Buildings and 
foundations subject to such scour or water pressure loads shall be designed in 
accordance with SBC 301. This requirement shall govern in all matters pertaining 
to design, construction, and material properties wherever this requirement is in 
conflict with requirements contained in other standards referenced in this 
requirement. 
 
SECTION 1.2 
DESIGN 
 
1.2.0 
Allowable bearing pressures, allowable stresses and design formulas provided in 
this code shall be used with the allowable stress design load combinations 
specified in Section 2.4 SBC 301. The quality and design of materials used 
structurally in excavations, footings and foundations shall conform to the 
requirements specified in SBC 301, SBC 304, SBC 305, and SBC 306 of the Saudi 
Building Code. Excavations and fills shall also comply with SBC 201. 
 
1.2.1  
Foundation design for seismic overturning. Where the foundation is 
proportioned using the strength design load combinations of Section 2.3.2 SBC 
301, the seismic overturning moment need not exceed 75 percent of the value 
computed from Section 10.9.6 SBC 301 for the equivalent lateral force method, or 
Sections 10.10 and 10.14 SBC 301 for the modal analysis method. 
 
SECTION 1.3 
DEFINITIONS 
 
1.3.0 
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the 
meanings shown herein. 
 
Acceptance Level. Acceptance level is the vibration level (displacement, velocity, 
or acceleration) at which a machine can run indefinitely without inducing vibration 
related maintenance. 
 
Active Zone. Active zone is the upper zone of the soil deposit which is affected by 
the seasonal moisture content variations.  
 
Alarm Level.  Alarm level is the vibration level at which a machine is considered 
to have developed a defect that will result in related downtime.  This level is 
usually higher than the acceptance level to allow for conservatism and machinery 
variance and is recommended as 1.5 times the acceptance level but may be varied, 
depending on specific experience or operational requirements.  
 


--- Page 18 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/2 
 
Allowable Foundation Pressure. Allowable foundation pressure is a vertical 
pressure exerted by a foundation on a supporting formation which can be safely 
tolerated without causing detrimental settlement or shear failure.  
 
Allowable Lateral Pressure. Allowable lateral pressure is a lateral pressure 
exerted due to a foundation or earth pressure which can be safely tolerated without 
causing neither shear failure nor detrimental lateral movement. 
  
Augered Uncased Piles. Augered uncased piles are piles constructed by 
depositing concrete into an uncased augered hole, either during or after the 
withdrawal of the auger. 
 
Backfill. Backfill is earth filling a trench or an excavation under or around a 
building. 
 
Belled Piers.  Belled piers are cast-in-place concrete piers constructed with a base 
that is larger than the diameter of the remainder of the pier. The belled base is 
designed to increase the load-bearing area of the pier in end bearing and to resist 
upward heave in expansive soils. 
 
 
 
 Building Official. Building official means the officer or other designated authority 
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or his duly 
authorized representatives. 
 
 
 
 Borehole. Borehole is a hole made by boring into the ground to study 
stratification, to obtain natural resources, or to release underground pressures.  
 
 
 
Caisson Piles.  Caisson piles are cast-in-place concrete piles extending into 
bedrock.  The upper portion of a caisson pile consists of a cased pile that extends 
to the bedrock.  The lower portion of the caisson pile consists of an uncased socket 
drilled into the bedrock. 
 
Cantilever Reinforced Concrete Wall. A cantilever T-type reinforced concrete 
wall consists of a concrete stem and base slab which form an inverted T. 
 
Cantilever or Strap Footing. Cantilever or strap footing is a setup of a concrete 
beam placed on two adjacent footings which supports concentrated loads exerted 
at or close to the edge of the beam. The strap footing is used to connect an 
eccentrically loaded column footing to an interior column such that the transmitted 
moment caused from eccentricity to the interior column footing so that a uniform 
soil pressure is computed beneath both footings.  
 
 
Cavity. Cavity is an underground opening with widely varying sizes caused 
mainly by solution of rock materials by water. 
 
  
Collapse Index. Collapse index is the percentage of vertical relative magnitude of 
soil collapse determined at 200 KPa as per ASTM D 5333. 
 
 
Collapse Potential. Collapse potential is the percentage of vertical relative 
magnitude of soil collapse determined at any stress level as per ASTM D 5333. 
 


--- Page 19 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/3 
 
 
Collapsible Soils. Collapsible soils are deposits that are characterized by sudden 
and large volume decrease at constant stress when inundated with water. These 
deposits are comprised primarily of silt or fine sand-sized particles with small 
amounts of clay, and may contain gravel. Collapsible soils have low density, but 
are relatively stiff and strong in their dry state.  
 
Column. Column is a member with a ratio of height-to-least-lateral dimension 
exceeding three, used primarily to support axial compressive load. 
 
Combined Footing. Combined footing is a structural unit or assembly of units 
supporting more than one column load. 
 
 
Compaction. Compaction is increasing the dry density of soils by means such as 
impact or by rolling the surface layers. 
 
 
 
Concrete-Filled Steel Pipe and Tube Piles. Concrete-filled steel pipe and tube 
piles are constructed by driving a steel pipe or tube section into the soil and filling 
the pipe or tube section with concrete.  The steel pipe or tube section is left in 
place during and after the deposition of the concrete. 
 
Contact Pressure. Contact pressure or soil pressure is the pressure acting at and 
perpendicular to the contact area between footing and soil, produced by the weight 
of the footing and all forces acting on it. 
 
 
Continuous or Strip Footing. Continuous or strip footing is a combined footing 
of prismatic or truncated shape, supporting two or more columns in a row. 
Continuous or strip footings may be of fixed thickness or upper face can be 
stepped or inclined with inclination or steepness not exceeding 1 unit vertical in 2 
units horizontal. 
 
 
Distortion Resistance. Distortion resistance corresponds to moment resistance to 
bending of beams, columns, footings and joints between them. 
 
 
 
Driven Uncased Piles. Driven uncased piles are constructed by driving a steel 
shell into the soil to shore an unexcavated hole that is later filled with concrete.  
The steel casing is lifted out of the hole during the deposition of the concrete. 
 
Effective Depth of Section. Effective depth of section is the distance measured 
from the extreme compression fiber to centeroid of tension reinforcement. 
 
Enlarged Based Piles. Enlarged base piles are cast-in-place concrete piles 
constructed with a base that is larger than the diameter of the remainder of the pile.  
The enlarged base is designed to increase the load-bearing area of the pile in end 
bearing. 
 
Erosion. Erosion is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the 
movement of wind and water. 
 
Excavation. Excavation is the mechanical or manual removal of earth material. 
 


--- Page 20 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/4 
 
Expansion Index. Expansion index is the percent volume change determined in 
accordance with ASTM-D4829 multiplied by fraction passing No. 4 sieve of the 
soil multiplied by 100.  
 
Expansion Joints. Expansion joints are intentional plane of weakness between 
parts of a concrete structure designed to prevent the crushing and distortion, 
including displacement, buckling, warping of abutting concrete structural units that 
might otherwise be developed by expansion, applied loads, or differential 
movements arising from the configuration of the structure or its settlement.   
 
Expansive Soil. Expansive soil is a soil or rock material that has a potential for 
shrinking or swelling under changing moisture conditions. These soils are known 
to exist in many locations in the Kingdom such as Al-Ghatt, Tabuk, Tyma, Al-
Madinah Al-Munuwarah, Al-Hafouf, and Sharora. 
 
Factor of Safety. Factor of safety is the ratio of ultimate bearing capacity to the 
allowable load-bearing. 
 
 
 
 Fill. Fill is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
 
 
 
 Flexural Length. Flexural length is the length of the pile from the first point of 
zero lateral deflection to the underside of the pile cap or grade beam. 
 
Footing. Footing is that portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads and 
transmits loads directly to the soil. 
 
Foundation. Foundation is the portion of a structure which transmits the building 
load to the ground. 
 
Geotechnical Engineer. Geotechnical engineer is an engineer knowledgeable and 
experienced in soil and rock engineering. 
 
Geotechnical Engineering. Geotechnical engineering is the application of the 
principles of soils and rock mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design 
of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and/or testing 
of the construction thereof. 
 
Grade. Grade is the vertical location of the ground surface. 
 
Grade Beam. Grade beam is a continuous beam subject to flexure longitudinally, 
loaded by the line of columns it supports. 
 
Gravity Concrete Wall. A gravity wall consists of mass concrete, generally 
without reinforcement. It is proportioned so that the resultant of the forces acting 
on any internal plane through the wall falls within, or close to, the kern of the 
section. 
 
Grid Foundation. Grid foundation is a combined footing, formed by intersecting 
continuous footings, loaded at the intersection points and covering much of the 
total area within the outer limits of assembly. 
 


--- Page 21 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/5 
 
Group R Occupancy. See SBC 201. 
 
Group U Occupancy. See SBC 201. 
 
Heavy Machinery. Heavy machinery is any machinery having rotating or 
reciprocating masses as the major moving parts (such as compressors, pumps, 
electric motors, diesel engines and turbines). 
 
High-Tuned System. High-tuned system is a machine support/foundation system 
in which the operating frequency (range) of the machinery (train) is below all 
natural frequencies of the system. 
 
Influence Zone. Influence zone is the zone under the foundation lying inside the 
vertical stress contours of value 0.1 of applied pressure. 
 
Karst Formation. Karst formation is a type of topography that is formed on 
limestone, dolomite, marble, gypsum, anhydrite, halite or other soluble rocks. Its 
formation is the result of chemical solution of these rocks by percolating waters 
that commonly follow the pre-existing joint patterns and enlarge them to caverns.  
Sinkholes and solution cavities at or near the ground surface are characteristic 
features of karst, and pose a hazard in the Eastern and Central regions of Saudi 
Arabia. Collapse features are widespread in these regions and are commonly 
associated with carbonate and evaporite formations that have been subjected to 
karst development during Quaternary pluvial epochs. 
 
Lateral Sliding Resistance. Lateral sliding resistance is the resistance of 
structural walls or foundations to lateral sliding, and it is controlled by interface 
friction and vertical loads.  
 
Low-Tuned System. Low-tuned system is a machine support/foundation system 
in which the operating frequency (range) of the machinery (train) is above all 
natural frequencies of the system. 
 
Machine Support/Foundation System. Machine support/foundation system is a 
system consisting of the machinery (train) including base plate and the foundation, 
support structure plus all piers, equipment and process piping supported on the 
foundation or machinery. The supporting soil, piling or structure shall be 
considered part of the machine foundation system. 
 
Mat Area. Mat area is the contact area between mat foundation and supporting 
soil. 
 
Mat Foundation. Mat foundation is a continuous footing supporting an array of 
columns in several rows in each direction, having a slab like shape with or without 
depressions or openings, covering an area of at least 75 % of the total area within 
the outer limits of the assembly. 
 
Mixed System. A Mixed system is a machine support/foundation system having 
one or more of its natural frequencies below and the rest above the operating 
frequency (range) of the machinery (train). 
 


--- Page 22 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/6 
 
Modulus of Elasticity. Modulus of elasticity is the ratio of normal stress to 
corresponding strain for tensile or compressive stresses below proportional limit of 
material. 
 
Modulus of Subgrade Reaction. Modulus of subgrade reaction is the ratio 
between the vertical pressure against the footing or mat and the deflection at a 
point of the surface of contact. 
 
Mortar. Mortar is a mixture of cementitious material and aggregate to which 
sufficient water and approved additives, if any, have been added to achieve a 
workable, plastic consistency. 
 
Natural Frequency. Natural frequency is the frequency with which an elastic 
system vibrates under the action of forces inherent in the system and in the 
absence of any externally applied force.  
 
Net Pressure. Net pressure is the pressure that can be applied to the soil in 
addition to the overburden due to the lowest adjacent grade. 
 
Overburden. Overburden is the weight of soil or backfill from base of foundation 
to ground surface.  
 
Overturning. Overturning is the horizontal resultant of any combination of forces 
acting on the structure tending to rotate as a whole about a horizontal axis. 
 
 
 
 Pier Foundations. Pier foundations consist of isolated cast-in-place concrete 
structural elements extending into firm materials.  Piers are relatively short in 
comparison to their width, with lengths less than or equal to 12 times the least 
horizontal dimension of the pier.  Piers derive their load-carrying capacity through 
skin friction, through end bearing, or a combination of both. 
 
 
 
 Pile Foundations. Pile foundations consist of concrete or steel structural elements 
either driven into the ground or cast in place.  Piles are relatively slender in 
comparison to their length, with lengths exceeding 12 times the least horizontal 
dimension.  Piles derive their load-carrying capacity through skin friction, through 
end bearing, or a combination of both. 
 
Pressed Edge. Pressed edge is the edge of footing or mat along which the greatest 
soil pressure occurs under the condition of overturning. 
 
Rectangular Combined Footing. Rectangular combined footing is a combined 
footing used if the column which is eccentric with respect to a spread footing 
carries a smaller load than the interior columns. 
 
Registered Design Professional. Registered design professional is an individual 
who is registered or licensed to practice the respective design profession as defined 
by the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state or 
jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. 
 
Reinforced Concrete. Reinforced concrete is structural concrete reinforced with 
no less than the minimum amounts of nonprestressed reinforcement specified in 
SBC 304.  


--- Page 23 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/7 
 
 
Reinforcement. Reinforcement is material that conforms to SBC 304 Section 3.5, 
excluding prestressing steel unless specifically included. 
 
Retaining Walls. Retaining walls are structures that laterally support and provide 
stability for soils or other materials, where existing conditions do not provide 
stability with neither natural nor artificial slope. 
 
Rocks. Rocks are natural aggregate of minerals or mineraloids that are connected 
together by strong bondings or attractive forces and have some degree of chemical 
and mineralogical constancy. 
 
Rock Quality Designation. Rock quality designation, RQD, is an index or 
measure of the quality of a rock mass, and is calculated as summation of length of 
intact pieces of core greater than100 mm in length divided by the whole length of 
core advance. 
 
 
Sabkhas. Sabkhas are salt bearing arid climate sediments covering vast areas of 
the coasts of Saudi Arabia. These soils either border partially land-locked seas or 
cover a number of continental depressions. The development of this material is due 
to low wave energy allowing the settlement of silt and clay particles to take place 
and then be loosely cemented by soluble material. Varying quantities of calcium 
carbonate, magnesium carbonate, calcium sulphate and calcium, magnesium, and 
sodium chlorides are found. The sabkha sediments are highly variable in lateral 
and vertical extent; various soil types, primarily composed of clays, silts, fine 
sands, and organic matter are interlayered at random. In general, sabkha sediments 
are characterized by high void ratios and low dry densities. Accordingly, upon 
wetting sabkha soil is renowned for being highly compressible material with low 
bearing resistance, and hence considered among the poorest of foundation 
materials. Sabkha terrains are known to exist in many locations in the Kingdom 
such as Jubail, Rastanura, Abqaiq, Dammam, and Shaibah along the Arabian Gulf 
coast. They are prevailed in Jeddah, Jizan, Qunfudah, Al-Lith, Rabigh, and Yanbu 
along the Western coast as well as in Wadi As-Sirhan, around Qasim, and around 
Riyadh. 
 
Settlement. Settlement is the gradual downward movement of an engineering 
structure, due to compression of the soil below the foundation. 
 
Shallow Foundations. Shallow foundations are foundations with their depths less 
or equal to their widths. 
 
Shoring. Shoring is the process of strengthening the side of excavation during 
construction stage. 
 
Slope. Slope is the inclined surface of any part of the earth’s surface. 
 
Soils. Soils are uncemented or weakly cemented accumulation of solid particles 
that have resulted from the disintegration of rocks. 
 
Soil mechanics. Soil mechanics is the branch of geotechnical engineering that 
deals with the physical properties of soil and the behavior of soil masses subjected 


--- Page 24 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/8 
 
to various types of forces. It applies the basic principles of mechanics including 
kinematics, dynamics, fluid mechanics, and the mechanics of materials to soils. 
 
Spiral reinforcement. Spiral reinforcement is continuously wound reinforcement 
in the form of a cylindrical helix. 
 
Spread Footing. Spread footing is a concrete pad supporting column load. It can 
take a rectangular, square or a circular shape and having a uniform or tapered 
thickness not less than 250 mm.  
 
Spring Constant. Spring constant is the soil resistance in load per unit deflection 
obtained as the product of the contributory area and coefficient of vertical 
subgrade reaction. 
 
Steady-State Dynamic Force. Steady-state dynamic force is any dynamic force 
which is periodic in nature and generated during normal operating conditions, such 
as centrifugal forces due to unbalances in rotating machinery or piston forces in 
reciprocating machinery. 
 
Steel-Cased Piles. Steel-cased piles are constructed by driving a steel shell into 
the soil to shore an unexcavated hole.  The steel casing is left permanently in place 
and filled with concrete. 
 
Support/Foundation. Support/foundation is the part of the machine support not 
supplied by the equipment manufacturer as part of the machinery (train).  This 
may include but is not limited to piers, concrete mat or block, pilings, steel 
structures, anchor bolts and embedded foundation plates. 
 
Surcharge. Surcharge is the load applied to ground surface above a foundation, 
retaining wall, or slope. 
 
Swell Pressure. Swell pressure is the maximum applied stress required to 
maintain constant volume of an inundated sample in the oedometer. 
 
Table Top.  Table top is a reinforced concrete structure supporting elevated 
machinery. 
 
Total Core Recovery. Total core recovery, TCR, is the total length of rock pieces 
recovered divided by the total length of core advance. 
 
Transient Dynamic Force. Transient dynamic force is any dynamic force which 
is short term in nature such as starting torques or short circuit moments in 
electrical machinery, hydraulic forces, resonance forces of low-tuned or mixed 
systems during start-up or shut-down. 
 
Trapezoidal-Shaped Combined Footing. Trapezoidal-shaped combined footing 
is a combined footing used when the column which has too limited space for a 
spread footing carries the larger load. 
 
Underpinning. Underpinning is the process of strengthening and stabilizing the 
foundation of an existing building or other structure. Underpinning may be 
necessary for a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, the original 


--- Page 25 ---
GENERAL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
1/9 
 
foundation is simply not be strong enough or stable enough, the use of the 
structure has changed, the properties of the soil supporting the foundation may 
have changed or was mischaracterized during planning, the construction of nearby 
structures necessitates the excavation of soil supporting existing foundation. 
Underpinning is accomplished by extending the foundation in depth or in breadth 
so it either rests on a stronger soil stratum or distributes its load across a greater 
area. 
 
Wall Footing. Wall footing is strip footing supporting wall such that the 
centerlines of the footing and the wall coincide.  
 
Water Table. Water table is the planar surface between the zone of saturation and 
the zone of aeration. Also known as free-water elevation; free water surface; 
groundwater level; groundwater surface, groundwater table; level of saturation; 
phreatic surface; plane of saturation; saturated surface; water level; and waterline.  
 
Weep Holes. Weep holes are openings used in retaining walls to permit passage of 
water from the backfill to the front. 
 
 
 


--- Page 26 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/1 
 
CHAPTER 2 
SITE INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SECTION 2.1 
GENERAL 
 
2.1.0 
Site investigations shall be conducted in conformance with Sections 2.2 through 
2.6. Where required by the building official, the classification and investigation of 
the soil shall be made by a registered design professional. 
 
2.1.1  
Objectives. Site investigation shall be planned and executed to determine the 
following: 
1. 
Lateral distribution and thickness of the soil and rock strata within the zone 
of   influence of the proposed construction. 
2. 
Suitability of the site for the proposed work. 
3. 
Proposal of best method for construction on the site. 
4. 
Physical and engineering properties of the soil and rock formations. 
5. 
Groundwater conditions with consideration of seasonal changes and the 
effects of extraction due to construction. 
6. 
Hazardous conditions including unstable slopes, active or potentially active 
faults, regional seismicity, floodplains, ground subsidence, collapse, and 
heave potential. 
7. 
Changes that may arise in the environment and the effects of these changes 
on the proposed and adjacent buildings. 
8. 
Advice on the suitability of alternative location for the proposed building, if 
exists. 
9. 
Thorough understanding of all subsurface conditions that may affect the 
proposed building. 
 
SECTION 2.2 
SCOPE 
 
2.2.0 
The owner or applicant shall submit a site investigation to the building official where 
required in Sections 2.2.1 through 2.2.6. 
Exception: 
 The building official need not require a site investigation where satisfactory data 
from adjacent areas is available that demonstrates an investigation is not necessary 
for any of the conditions in Sections 2.2.1 through 2.2.5. 
 
No site investigation report is needed if the building meets the following combined 
criteria: 
1. 
The net applied load on the foundation is less than 50 kPa. 
2. 
There are no dynamic or vibratory loads on the building. 
3. 
Questionable or problematic soil is not suspected underneath the building. 
4. 
Cavities are not suspected underneath the footing of the building. 


--- Page 27 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/2 
 
 
2.2.1  
Questionable soil. Where the safe-sustaining power of the soil is in doubt, or 
where a load-bearing value superior to that specified in this code is claimed, the 
building official shall require that the necessary investigation be made. Such 
investigation shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2.4 through 2.6. 
 
2.2.2  
Problematic soils. In areas likely to have expansive, collapsible, or sabkha soils, the 
building official shall require site investigation to determine where such soils do 
exist. 
 
2.2.3  
Ground-water table. A subsurface soil investigation shall be performed to 
determine whether the existing groundwater table is within the influence zone 
underneath the footing of the building.   
 
2.2.4  
Rock strata. Where subsurface explorations at the project site indicate variations or 
doubtful characteristics in the structure of the rock upon which foundations are to 
be constructed, a sufficient number of borings shall be made to a depth of not less 
than 3 m below the level of the foundations to provide assurance of the soundness of 
the foundation bed and its load-bearing capacity. 
2.2.4.1  
Rock cavities. In areas of karst formations, the building official shall require site 
investigation to determine the potential sizes and locations of cavities underneath 
the building. If cavities are encountered, such investigation shall recommend 
remedies and construction procedures. 
 
2.2.5  
Seismic Design Category C. Where a structure is determined to be in Seismic 
Design Category C in accordance  with  Chapters 9 through 16 of SBC 301,  an  
investigation  shall  be  conducted,  and  shall  include  an  evaluation  of  the  
following potential hazards resulting from earthquake motions: slope instability, 
liquefaction and surface rupture due to faulting or lateral spreading. 
 
2.2.6  
Seismic Design Category D. Where the structure is determined to be in Seismic 
Design Category D, in accordance with Chapters 9 through 16 of SBC 301, the soils 
investigation requirements for Seismic Design Category C, given in Section 2.2.5, 
shall be met, in addition to the following. The investigation shall include: 
1.  A determination of lateral pressures on basement and retaining walls due to 
earthquake motions. 
2.  An assessment of potential consequences of any liquefaction and soil strength 
loss, including estimation of differential settlement, lateral movement or 
reduction in foundation soil-bearing capacity, and shall address mitigation 
measures. Such measures shall be given consideration in the design of the 
structure and can include, but are not limited to, ground stabilization, 
selection of appropriate foundation type and depths, selection of appropriate 
structural systems to accommodate anticipated displacements or any 
combination of these measures. The potential for liquefaction and soil strength 
loss shall be evaluated for site peak ground acceleration magnitudes and 
source characteristics consistent with the design earthquake ground motions.  
 
 


--- Page 28 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/3 
 
SECTION 2.3 
SOIL CLASSIFICATION 
 
2.3.0 
Where required, soils shall be classified in accordance with Sections 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 
2.3.3, or 2.3.4. 
 
2.3.1  
General. For the purposes of this section, the definition and classification of soil 
materials for use in Table 4.1 shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2487. 
 
2.3.2  
Expansive soils. Soils meeting all four of the following provisions shall be 
considered expansive. Compliance with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if the 
test prescribed in Item 4 is conducted: 
1. 
Plasticity index of 15 or greater, determined in accordance with ASTM D 
4318. 
2. 
More than 10 percent of the soil particles pass a No. 200 sieve (75 
micrometers), determined in accordance with ASTM D 422. 
3. 
More than 10 percent of the soil particles are less than 5 micrometers in size, 
determined in accordance with ASTM D 422. 
4. 
Expansion index greater than 20, determined in accordance with ASTM D 
4829. 
 
2.3.3 
Collapsible soils. Soils meeting all four of the following provisions shall be 
considered collapsible. Compliance with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if 
the test prescribed in Item 4 is conducted: 
1.   Desiccated Alluvial (Wadi) soils 
2.   Dry field density less than 17 kN/m3 determined in accordance with ASTM 
D1556 
3.   Clay content 10 to 30 percent, determined in accordance with ASTM D422 
4.   Collapse index greater than 1percent, determined in accordance with ASTM 
D5333.   
 
2.3.4  
Sabkha soils. Soils meeting the following shall be suspected as sabkha soils: 
1. 
Very soft, with SPT values in the range of 0 to 8, determined in accordance 
with ASTM D1586.  
2. 
Precipitated salts of different sizes, shape, and composition within the 
sediments. 
3. 
High soluble salt content. 
4. 
Soil exhibits significant variations in its chemical composition. 
5. 
Soil exhibits high degree of variability of its sediments in both vertical and 
lateral extent within a considerably short distance. 
6. 
Upon wetting soil becomes impassible. 


--- Page 29 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/4 
 
 
SECTION 2.4 
INVESTIGATION 
 
2.4.0 
Soil investigation shall be based on observation and any necessary tests of the 
materials disclosed by borings, test pits or other subsurface exploration made in 
appropriate locations. Additional studies shall be made as necessary to evaluate 
slope stability, soil strength, position and adequacy of load-bearing soils, the effect 
of moisture variation on soil-bearing capacity, compressibility, liquefaction, 
expansiveness, and collapsibility.  
 
2.4.1  
Exploratory boring. The scope of the site investigation  including  the  number  
and  types  of  borings  or soundings,  the  equipment  used  to  drill  and  sample,  
the in-situ testing equipment and the laboratory testing program shall be determined 
by a registered design professional. In areas likely to have problematic soils, field 
explorations shall include: 
1. 
Investigations of soils between the ground surface and the bottom of the 
foundation, as well as materials beneath the proposed depth of foundation.  
2. 
Evaluations and interpretations of the environmental conditions that would 
contribute to moisture changes and their probable effects on the behavior of 
such soils. 
 
2.4.2  
Number of boreholes. The minimum number of boreholes in a given site shall be 
taken in accordance with Table 2.1 and its provisions. The values included in 
Table 2.1 shall be considered as minimum guideline.  
 
2.4.3  
Depth of boreholes. The depth of boreholes shall cover all strata likely to be 
affected by the loads from the building and adjacent buildings. The minimum 
depth of boreholes shall be taken from Table 2.1. 
 
SECTION 2.5 
SOIL BORING AND SAMPLING 
 
2.5.0 
The soil boring and sampling procedure and apparatus shall be in accordance with 
generally accepted engineering practice. The registered design professional shall 
have a fully qualified representative on the site during all boring and sampling 
operations.  
 
2.5.1  
Soil boring and sampling of expansive soils. In areas likely to have expansive 
soils the following shall be taken into considerations: 
1. 
Air drilling shall be used to maintain the natural moisture contents of the 
samples more effectively. 
2. 
The use of lubricant that might react with the soil and change its properties 
shall be avoided. 


--- Page 30 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/5 
 
3. 
The depth of sampling shall be at least as deep as the probable depth to 
which moisture changes will occur (active zone) but shall not be less than 1.5 
times the minimum width of slab foundations to a maximum of 30 meters 
and a minimum of three base diameters beneath the base of shaft 
foundations. 
4. 
Undisturbed samples shall be obtained at intervals of not greater than 1500 
mm of depth. Sampling interval may be increased with depth. 
5. 
A coating of wax shall be brushed on the sample before wrapping. 
6. 
The outer perimeter of the sample shall be trimmed during the preparation of 
specimens for laboratory tests, leaving the more undisturbed inner core. 
7. 
The sample shall be taken as soon as possible, after advancing the hole to the 
proper depth and cleaning out the hole, and personnel shall be well trained to 
expedite proper sampling, sealing, and storage in sample containers. 
 
2.5.2  
Soil boring and sampling of collapsible soils. In areas likely to have collapsible 
soils the following shall be taken into considerations: 
1.    Air drilling shall be used to maintain the natural moisture contents of the 
samples. 
2.    The depth of sampling shall be at least as deep as the probable depth to 
which moisture changes will occur but shall not be less than 2 times the 
minimum width of footing to a maximum of 30 meters and a minimum of 
three base diameters beneath the base of shaft foundations. 
3.    Undisturbed samples shall be obtained at intervals of not greater than 1500 
mm of depth.   
4.    In the event undisturbed samples cannot be obtained from a borehole, test 
pits shall be excavated to sufficient depth and dry density of the soil shall be 
measured at various horizons in the pit.  
5.    Where possible, hand carved undisturbed samples taken in a vertical 
direction shall be obtained for odometer testing. Alternately, plate load test in 
unsoaked and soaked conditions shall be performed to determine the most 
critical collapse potential below foundation level. 
 
2.5.3  
Soil boring and sampling of sabkha soils. In areas likely to have sabkha soils the 
following shall be taken into considerations: 
1.    A full chemical analyses on soil and ground water to determine the average 
and range of the aggressive compounds and the variation in content with 
depth. 
2.    Grading of sabkha shall be determined by using wet sieving with non-polar 
solvent (sabkha brine, methylene chloride) 
3.    Basic properties including moisture content and specific gravity shall be 
determined by using oven drying at 60 ° C in accordance with ASTM D854 
and ASTM D2216. 


--- Page 31 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/6 
 
SECTION 2.6 
REPORTS 
 
2.6.0 
The soil classification and design load-bearing capacity shall be shown on the 
construction document. Where required by the building official, a written report of 
the investigation shall be submitted that includes, but need not be limited to, the 
following information: 
1. 
Introduction with location map depicting adjacent buildings, existing roads, 
and utility lines. 
2. 
Climatic conditions such as rain rate, storm water discharge, etc. if relevant 
effect is suspected on the soil or rock formations. 
3. 
Description of site topography and relevant geological information. 
4. 
A plot showing the location of test borings and/or excavation pits. 
5. 
A complete record of the soil samples. 
6. 
A complete record of the borehole log with the standard penetration test, 
SPT, values at the corresponding depths for soil samples and RQD and TCR 
values for rock samples.  
7. 
A record of the soil profile. 
8. 
Elevation of the water table, if encountered and recommended procedures for 
dewatering, if necessary. 
9. 
Brief description of conducted laboratory and field tests (or its SASO or 
ASTM standards, or equivalent standard number) and a summary of the 
results. 
10. Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria, including but not 
limited to: bearing capacity of natural or compacted soil; provisions to 
mitigate the effects of problematic soils (expansive, collapsible, sabkha, 
etc.); mitigation of the effects of liquefaction, differential settlement and 
varying soil strength; and the effects of adjacent loads. The recommendations 
for foundation design must be based on the facts stated in the report, i.e. on 
the borehole records and test data. They must not be based on conjecture. 
11. Expected total and differential settlements. 
12. Pile and pier foundation information in accordance with Section 14.2. 
13. Combined footings and mats information in accordance with Section 8.1. 
14. Special design and construction provisions for footings or foundations 
founded on problematic soils in accordance with Chapters 9, 10, and 11, as 
necessary. 
15. Compacted fill material properties and testing in accordance with Section 
3.10. 
16. Recommended sites for waste material disposal. 
17. Suitability of excavated material for reuse as fill material in site. 
 
 
 


--- Page 32 ---
SITE INVESTIGATIONS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
2/7 
 
 
 
TABLE 2.1 
MINIMUM NUMBER AND MINIMUM DEPTHS OF 
 BOREHOLES FOR BUILDINGSa,b,c,d,e 
 
NO.  OF 
STORIES 
BUILT AREA 
(m2) 
NO. OF 
BOREHOLES 
MINIMUM DEPTHf OF 
TWO THIRDS OF THE 
BOREHOLES (m) 
MINIMUM DEPTHf 
OF ONE THIRD OF 
THE BOREHOLES 
(m) 
 
< 600 
3 
4 
6 
2 or less 
600 – 5000 
3 – 10g 
5 
8 
 
> 5000 
Special investigation 
3 - 4 
< 600 
3 
 
 
 
600 – 5000 
3 – 10g
6 - 8 
9 - 12 
 
> 5000 
Special investigation 
5 or higher 
Special investigation 
 
a. If possible, standard penetration tests, SPT, shall be performed in all sites. 
b. If questionable soils do exist underneath the building, a minimum of one borehole shall 
penetrate all layers containing this soil. 
c. Seasonal changes in groundwater table and the degree of saturation shall be considered. 
d. If sufficient data is available, a registered design professional may use number and depth 
of boreholes that are different from the tabular values.  
e. For foundation of pole and towers, a minimum of one boring with sufficient depth shall be 
located in the center of the foundation.  
f. Depth is measured from level of foundation bottom. 
g. Number of boreholes shall be selected by a registered design professional based on 
variations in site conditions, and contractor shall advice if additional or special tests are 
required. 
 


--- Page 33 ---
E X C A V A T I O N ,  G R A D I N G  A N D  F I L L  
SBC 303 
2007 
3/1 
 
CHAPTER 3 
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND FILL  
 
SECTION 3.1 
GENERAL 
 
3.1.0 
Proper safety precautions shall be considered at all stages of excavation. Special 
care, measures, and techniques shall be followed for excavation below 
groundwater table.  
The investigation and report provisions of Chapter 2 shall be expanded to include, 
but need not be limited to, the following: 
1. 
Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain 
and area drainage. 
2. 
Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the 
grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction. 
3. 
Detail plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, 
and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the 
proposed work. 
4. 
Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to 
be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on adjacent land 
which are within 5 m of the property or which may be affected by the 
proposed grading operations. 
5. 
Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic 
conditions on the proposed construction, and the adequacy of sites to be 
developed by the proposed grading. 
 
SECTION 3.2 
COMMENCEMENT 
 
3.2.0 
Excavation, grading and fill shall not be commenced without first having obtained 
a permit from the building official. 
Exception: Permit shall not be required for the following: 
1. 
Grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no apparent danger to 
private or public property. 
2. 
Exploratory excavations under the direction of geotechnical engineers. 
3. 
An excavation which (a) is less than 600 mm in depth, or (b) which does not 
create a cut slope greater than 1500 mm in height and steeper than three units 
horizontal to two units vertical. 
4. 
A fill less than 300 mm in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope 
flatter than five units horizontal to one unit vertical, or less than 1 m in 
depth, not intended to support structures, does not exceed 40 cubic meters on 
any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 34 ---
E X C A V A T I O N ,  G R A D I N G  A N D  F I L L  
SBC 303 
2007 
3/2 
 
SECTION 3.3 
EXCAVATIONS NEAR FOOTINGS OR FOUNDATIONS 
 
3.3.0 
Excavations for buildings shall be carried out as not to endanger life or property. 
Excavations for any purposes shall not remove lateral support from any footing or 
foundation without first underpinning or protecting the footing or foundation 
against settlement or lateral translation. Proper underpinning, sequence of 
construction, and method of shoring shall be approved by a registered design 
professional and carried out immediately after start of excavation. Underpinning 
system shall be periodically checked for safety assurance. 
  
SECTION 3.4 
SLOPE LIMITS 
 
3.4.0 
Slopes for permanent fill shall not be steeper than one unit vertical in two units 
horizontal (50-percent slope). Cut slopes for permanent excavations shall not be 
steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope). Deviation 
from the foregoing limitations for cut slopes shall be permitted only upon the 
presentation of a soil investigation report acceptable to the building official and 
shows that a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or 
private property. 
 
SECTION 3.5 
SURCHARGE 
 
3.5.0 
No fill or other surcharge loads shall be placed adjacent to any building or 
structure unless such building or structure is capable of withstanding the additional 
loads caused by the fill or surcharge. Existing footings or foundations which can 
be affected by any excavation shall be underpinned adequately or otherwise 
protected against settlement and shall be protected against later movement. 
 
SECTION 3.6 
PLACEMENT OF BACKFILL 
 
3.6.0 
The excavation outside the foundation shall be backfilled with soil that is free of 
organic material, construction debris, cobbles and boulders or a controlled low-
strength material (CLSM). The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by 
removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials. 
The backfill shall be placed in lifts and compacted, in a manner that does not 
damage the foundation or the waterproofing or damp proofing material. Special 
inspections of compacted fill shall be in accordance with Section 2.7 SBC 302. 
Exception: Controlled low-strength material need not be compacted. 
 
SECTION 3.7 
SITE GRADING 
 
3.7.0 
The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation shall be sloped away from the 
building at a slope of not less than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5 
percent slope) for a minimum distance of 3 m measured perpendicular to the face 
of the wall or an approved alternate method of diverting water away from the 
foundation shall be used. 


--- Page 35 ---
E X C A V A T I O N ,  G R A D I N G  A N D  F I L L  
SBC 303 
2007 
3/3 
 
Exception: Where climate or soil conditions warrant, the slope of the ground 
away from the building foundation is permitted to be reduced to not less than one 
unit vertical in 50 units horizontal (2 percent slope).  
The procedure used to establish the final ground level adjacent to the foundation 
shall account for additional settlement of the backfill.   
 
 
SECTION 3.8 
GRADING DESIGNATION 
 
3.8.0 
The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against 
erosion. All grading in excess of 3500 cubic meters shall be performed in 
accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a registered design 
professional, and shall be designated as “engineering grading”. Grading involving 
less than 3500 cubic meters shall be designated as “regular grading” unless 
required by the building official to be considered as “engineering grading”.  
For engineering grading, grading plan shall be prepared and approved by a 
registered design professional. For regular grading, the building official may 
require inspection and testing by an approved agency. Where the building official 
has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading operation 
shall conform to “engineering grading” requirements. 
 
SECTION 3.9 
GRADING AND FILL IN FLOODWAYS 
 
3.9.0 
In floodways shown on the flood hazard map established in SBC 301 Section 5.3, 
grading and/or fill shall not be approved unless it has been demonstrated through 
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a registered design professional in 
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed grading or fill, or 
both, will not result in any increase levels during the occurrence of the design 
flood. 
 
SECTION 3.10 
COMPACTED FILL MATERIAL 
 
3.10.0 
Where footings will bear on compacted fill material, the compacted fill shall 
comply with the provisions of an approved report, which shall contain, but need 
not be limited to, the following: 
1. 
Specifications for the preparation of the site prior to placement of compacted 
fill material. 
2. 
Specifications for material to be used as compacted fill. 
3. 
Test method to be used to determine the maximum dry density and optimum 
moisture content of the material to be used as compacted fill. 
4. 
Maximum allowable thickness of each lift of compacted fill material. 
5. 
Field test method for determining the in-place dry density of the compacted 
fill. 
6. 
Minimum acceptable in-place dry density expressed as a percentage of the 
maximum dry density determined in accordance with Item 3. 


--- Page 36 ---
E X C A V A T I O N ,  G R A D I N G  A N D  F I L L  
SBC 303 
2007 
3/4 
 
7. 
Number and frequency of field tests required to determine compliance with 
Item 6. 
Exception: Compacted fill material less than 300 mm in depth need not comply 
with an approved report, provided it has been compacted to a minimum of 95 
percent Modified Proctor in accordance with ASTM D 1557. The compaction shall 
be verified by a qualified inspector approved by the building official.  
 
3.10.1  
Oversized materials. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum 
dimension greater than 300 mm shall be buried or placed in fills within 1.5 m, 
measured vertically, from the bottom of the footing or lowest finished floor 
elevation, whichever is lower, within the building pad. Oversized fill material shall 
be placed so as to assure the filling of all voids with well-graded soil. Specific 
placement and inspection criteria shall be stated and continuous special inspections 
shall be carried out during the placement of any oversized fill material.  
 
SECTION 3.11 
CONTROLLED LOW-STRENGTH MATERIAL (CLSM) 
 
3.11.0 
Where footings will bear on controlled low-strength material (CLSM), the CLSM 
shall comply with the provisions of an approved report, which shall contain, but 
need not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Specifications for the preparation of the site prior to placement of the CLSM. 
2.  Specifications for the CLSM. 
3.  Laboratory or field test method(s) to be used to determine the compressive 
strength or bearing capacity of the CLSM. 
4.  Test methods for determining the acceptance of the CLSM in the field. 
5.  Number and frequency of field tests required to determine compliance with 
Item 4. 
  


--- Page 37 ---
ALLOWABLE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
4/1
 
CHAPTER 4 
ALLOWABLE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF SOILS 
 
SECTION 4.1 
DESIGN 
 
 
4.1.0 
The presumptive load-bearing values provided in Table 4.1 shall be used with the 
allowable stress design load combinations specified in Section 2.4 of SBC 301. 
 
SECTION 4.2 
PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES 
 
4.2.0 
The maximum allowable foundation pressure, lateral pressure or lateral sliding 
resistance values for supporting soils at or near the surface shall not exceed the 
values specified in Table 4.1 unless data to substantiate the use of a higher value 
are submitted and approved by the building official. In case of thin soft layers 
existing between layers of high bearing values, the foundation shall be designed 
according to the bearing capacity of the thin soft layers. 
Presumptive load-bearing values shall apply to materials with similar physical 
characteristics and depositional conditions.  
Mud, organic silt, organic clays, peat or unprepared fill shall not be assumed to 
have a presumptive load-bearing capacity unless data to substantiate the use of 
such a value are submitted. 
 
 
Exception: A presumptive load-bearing capacity is permitted to be used where the 
building official deems the load-bearing capacity of mud, organic silt or 
unprepared fill is adequate for the support of lightweight and temporary structures. 
 
TABLE 4.1 
ALLOWABLE FOUNDATION AND LATERAL PRESSURE 
 
CLASS OF MATERIALS 
ALLOWABLE 
FOUNDATION 
PRESSURE 
(kPa)a 
LATERAL 
BEARING 
(kPa/m below 
natural 
grade)a 
LATERAL SLIDING
Coefficient 
of frictionb 
Resistance  
(kPa)c 
1. Crystalline bedrock 
600 
200 
0.70 
−
2. Sedimentary and foliated rock 
200 
60 
0.35 
−
3. Sandy gravel and/or gravel (GW 
and GP) 
150 
30 
0.35 
−
 
4. Sand, silty sand, clayey sand, 
silty gravel and clayey gravel 
(SW, SP, SM, SC, GM and GC) 
100 
25 
0.25 
−
 
5. Clay, sandy clay, silty clay, 
clayey silt, silt and sandy silt 
(CL, ML, MH and CH) 
75d 
15 
− 
6 
 
a.  An increase of one-third is permitted when using the alternate load combinations in SBC 301 Section 
2.4 that include wind or earthquake loads. 
b.  Coefficient to be multiplied by the dead load. 
c.  Lateral sliding resistance value to be multiplied by the contact area, as limited by Section 4.3. 
d.  Where the building official determines that in-place soils with an allowable bearing capacity of less 
than 70 kPa are likely to be present at the site, the allowable bearing capacity shall be determined by a 
site investigation in accordance with Chapter 2. 
 


--- Page 38 ---
ALLOWABLE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
4/2
 
SECTION 4.3 
LATERAL SLIDING RESISTANCE 
 
4.3.0 
The resistance of structural walls to lateral sliding shall be calculated by 
combining the values derived from the lateral bearing and the lateral sliding 
resistance shown in Table 4.1 unless data to substantiate the use of higher values 
are submitted for approval.  
For clay, sandy clay, silty clay and clayey silt, in no case shall the lateral sliding 
resistance exceed one-half the dead load. 
 
4.3.1  
Increases in allowable lateral sliding resistance. The resistance values derived 
from Table 4.1 are permitted to be increased by the tabular value for each 
additional 300 mm of depth to a maximum of 15 times the tabular value.  
Isolated poles for uses such as flagpoles or signs and poles used to support 
buildings that are not adversely affected by a 13 mm motion at the ground surface 
due to short-term lateral loads are permitted to be designed using lateral-bearing 
values equal to two times the tabular values. 
 
SECTION 4.4 
COMPUTED LOAD-BEARING VALUES 
 
4.4.0 
It shall be permitted to obtain the ultimate bearing capacity from appropriate 
laboratory and/or field tests including, but need not be limited to, standard 
penetration test conforming to ASTM D1586 and plate load test conforming to 
ASTM D1194. Where the soil to a deep depth is homogeneous soil, the plate load 
test shall be conducted at the level of footing bottom. In case the soil medium is 
made of several layers, the test shall be conducted at each layer to a depth equal to 
not less than twice the width of footing measured from the bottom of footing. In 
case there is a large difference between the footing width and plate size, plates of 
different sizes shall be used to establish the relationship between width and load-
bearing.  
It shall be permitted to use formulae in the computations of ultimate bearing 
capacity that are of common use in geotechnical engineering practice or based on a 
sound engineering judgment and subject to approval to the building official.  
 
4.4.1  
Effect of water table. The submerged unit weight shall be used as appropriate to 
determine the actual influence of the groundwater on the bearing capacity of the 
soil. The foundation design shall consider the buoyant forces when groundwater is 
above or expected to rise above the foundation level. 
  


--- Page 39 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/1 
 
CHAPTER 5 
SPREAD FOOTINGS 
 
SECTION 5.1 
GENERAL 
 
5.1.0 
Spread footings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 5.1 
through 5.6. Footings shall be built on undisturbed soil, compacted fill material or 
CLSM. Compacted fill material shall be placed in accordance with Section 3.10. 
CLSM shall be placed in accordance with Section 3.11.  
The bottom surface of footings is permitted to have a slope not exceeding one unit 
vertical in 10 units horizontal (10 percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where 
it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the 
surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10 
percent slope). 
 
SECTION 5.2 
DEPTH OF FOOTINGS 
 
5.2.0 
The minimum depth of footing below the natural ground level shall not be less 
than 1.2 m for cohesionless soils, 1.5 m for silty and clay soils and 600 mm to 
1200 mm for rocks depending on strength and integrity of the rock formations. 
Where applicable, the depth of footings shall also conform to Sections 5.2.1 
through 5.2.3. 
 
5.2.1  
Adjacent footings. Footings on granular soil shall be so located that the line 
drawn between the lower edges of adjoining footings shall not have a slope steeper 
than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) with the horizontal, unless the material supporting the 
higher footing is braced or retained or otherwise laterally supported in an approved 
manner or a greater slope has been properly established by engineering analysis 
that is accepted by the building official. 
 
5.2.2  
Shifting or moving soils. Where it is known that the shallow subsoils are of a 
shifting or moving character, footings shall be carried to a sufficient depth to 
ensure stability. 
 
5.2.3  
Stepped footings. Footings for all buildings where the surface of the ground 
slopes more than one unit vertical in ten units horizontal (10 percent slope) shall 
be level or shall be stepped so that both top and bottom of such footing are level.  
 
SECTION 5.3 
FOOTINGS ON OR ADJACENT TO SLOPES 
 
5.3.0 
The placement of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than one 
unit vertical in three units horizontal shall conform to Sections 5.3.1 through 5.3.5. 
 
5.3.1  
Building clearance from ascending slopes. In general, buildings below slopes 
shall be set a sufficient distance from the slope to provide protection from slope 
drainage, erosion and shallow failures. Except as provided for in Section 5.3.5 and 
Figure 5.1, the following criteria will be assumed to provide this protection. Where 
the existing slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100 


--- Page 40 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/2 
 
percent slope), the toe of the slope shall be assumed to be at the intersection of a 
horizontal plane drawn from the top of the foundation and a plane drawn tangent 
to the slope at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal. Where a 
retaining wall is constructed at the toe of the slope, the height of the slope shall be 
measured from the top of the wall to the top of the slope. 
 
5.3.2  
Footing setback from descending slope surface. Footings on or adjacent to slope 
surfaces shall be founded in firm material with an embedment and set back from 
the slope surface sufficient to provide vertical and lateral support for the footing 
without detrimental settlement. Except as provided for in Section 5.3.5 and Figure 
5.1, the following setback is deemed adequate to meet the criteria. Where the slope 
is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100 percent slope), the 
required setback shall be measured from imaginary plane 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to 
the horizontal, projected upward from the toe of the slope. 
 
5.3.3  
Pools. The setback between pools regulated by this code and slopes shall be equal 
to one-half the building footing setback distance required by this section. That 
portion of the pool wall within a horizontal distance of 2100 mm from the top of 
the slope shall be capable of supporting the water in the pool without soil support. 
 
 
FIGURE 5.1 
FOUNDATION CLEARANCES FROM SLOPES 
 
5.3.4  
Foundation elevation. On graded sites, the top of any exterior foundation shall 
extend above the elevation of the street gutter at point of discharge or the inlet of 
an approved drainage device a minimum of 300 mm plus 2 percent. Alternate 
elevations are permitted subject to the approval of the building official, provided it 
can be demonstrated that required drainage to the point of discharge and away 
from the structure is provided at all locations on the site. 
 
5.3.5  
Alternate setback and clearance. Alternate setbacks and clearances are 
permitted, subject to the approval of the building official. The building official is 
permitted to require an investigation and recommendation of a registered design 
professional to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. Such 
an investigation shall include consideration of material, height of slope, slope 
gradient, load intensity and erosion characteristics of slope material. 
 
 
 
 
 
H/3 BUT NEED NOT 
EXCEED 12M MAX
 
H/2 BUT NEED NOT EXCEED 5M MAX
 


--- Page 41 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/3 
 
SECTION 5.4 
DESIGN OF FOOTINGS 
 
5.4.0 
Spread footings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 
5.4.1 through 5.4.4. 
 
5.4.1  
General. Footings shall be so designed that the allowable bearing capacity of the 
soil is not exceeded, and that total and differential settlements are tolerable. The 
design of footings shall be under the direct supervision of a registered design 
professional who shall certify to the building official that the footing satisfies the 
design criteria. The minimum width of footings shall be 300 mm. Footings in areas 
with expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter 9. Footings in areas with collapsible soils shall be designed in accordance 
with the provisions of Chapter 10. Footings in areas with sabkha soils shall be 
designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11. Footings subject to 
vibratory loads shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12. 
5.4.1.1  
Design loads. Footings shall be designed for the most unfavorable effects due to 
the combinations of loads specified in SBC 301 Section 2.4. The dead load shall 
include the weight of foundations, footings and overlying fill. Reduced live loads, 
as specified in SBC 301 Section 4.8, are permitted to be used in designing 
footings. 
5.4.1.2  
Eccentric loads. When the footings are subjected to moments or eccentric loads, 
the maximum stresses shall not exceed the allowable bearing capacity of the soil 
specified in Chapter 4. The centeroid of the loads exerted on the footings shall 
coincide with the centeroid of the footing area, and if not possible the eccentricity 
shall not exceed 1/6 times the dimension of the footing in both sides. For the 
purpose of estimating the ultimate load-bearing, use shall be made of the effective 
width taken as the actual width minus twice the eccentricity.  
5.4.1.3  
Inclined loads. For design of footings subjected to inclined loads, it shall be 
permitted to use the following simplified formula or any method of analysis, 
subject to the approval of the building official.  
 
0.1
<
+
h
v
P
H
P
V
  
 
 
 
(Equation 5-1)  
 
 
where: 
V  
=   Vertical component of inclined load. 
H  
=   Horizontal component of inclined load. 
Pv  =   Allowable vertical load. 
Ph  =   Allowable horizontal load. 
 
Horizontal component shall not exceed soil passive resistance along the footing 
vertical edge and friction resistance at the footing soil interface taking a factor of 
safety of 2.  
5.4.1.4  
Adjacent loads. Where footings are placed at varying elevations the effect of 
adjacent loads shall be included in the footing design.  
5.4.1.5  
Design settlements. Settlements shall be estimated by a registered design 
professional based on methods of analysis approved by the building official. The 
least value found from Tables 5.1 and 5.2 shall be taken as the allowable 
differential settlement.  


--- Page 42 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/4 
 
   
Exceptions: Structures designed to stand excessive total settlement in coastal 
areas or heavily loaded structures, like silos and storage tanks, shall be allowed to 
exceed these limits subject to a recommendation of a registered design 
professional and approval of a building official. 
 
TABLE 5.1 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE TOTAL SETTLEMENT 
 
FOOTING TYPE 
TOTAL SETTLEMENT 
(mm) 
CLAY 
SAND 
Spread Footings 
60 
40 
Mat Foundations 
80 
60 
 
TABLE 5.2 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE ANGULAR DISTORTIONa 
 
BUILDING TYPE 
L/H 
l
δ
 
Multistory reinforced concrete structures 
founded on mat foundation  
--- 
0.0015 
Steel frame structure with side sway 
--- 
0.008 
Reinforced concrete or steel structure with 
interior or exterior  glass or panel cladding 
--- 
0.002-0.003 
Reinforced concrete or steel structure with 
interior or exterior  glass or panel cladding 
≥ 5 
≤ 3 
0.002 
0.001 
Slip and high structures as silos and water tanks 
founded on stiff mat foundations 
--- 
0.002 
Cylindrical steel  tank with fixed cover and 
founded on flexible footing  
--- 
0.008 
Cylindrical steel  tank with portable cover and 
founded on flexible footing  
--- 
0.002-0.003 
Rail for supporting hanged lift 
--- 
0.003 
 
a.   L   =   Building length  
      l   =   Span between adjacent footings  
      H  =   Overall height of the structure 
      δ   =   Differential settlement 
 
5.4.1.6  
Factor of safety. Factor of safety shall not be less than 3 for permanent structures 
and 2 for temporary structures. Consideration shall be given to all possible 
circumstances including, but not limited to, flooding of foundation soil, removal of 
existing overburden by scour or excavation, and change in groundwater table level. 
 
5.4.2  
Concrete footings. The design, materials and construction of concrete footings 
shall comply with Sections 5.4.2.1 through 5.4.2.8 and the provisions of SBC 304 
where applicable. 
Exception: Where a specific design is not provided, concrete footings supporting 
walls of light-frame construction are permitted to be designed in accordance with 
Table 5.3. 
5.4.2.1  
Concrete strength. Concrete in footings shall have a specified compressive 
strength (
'
cf ) of not less than 20 MPa at 28 days. 
5.4.2.2  
Footing seismic ties. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic Design Category D 
in accordance with Chapters 9 through 16, SBC 301, individual spread footings 
founded on soil defined in Section 9.4.2, SBC 301 as Site Class E or F shall be 
interconnected by ties. Ties shall be capable of carrying, in tension or 


--- Page 43 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/5 
 
compression, a force equal to the product of the larger footing load times the 
seismic coefficient 
DS
S
 divided by 10 unless it is demonstrated that equivalent 
restraint is provided by reinforced concrete beams within slabs on grade or 
reinforced concrete slabs on grade. 
 
TABLE 5.3 
FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME 
CONSTRUCTION a, b, c, d, e 
 
NUMBER OF FLOORS 
SUPPORTED BY THE 
FOOTINGf 
WIDTH OF 
FOOTING 
(mm) 
THICKNESS OF 
FOOTING 
(mm) 
1 
300 
150 
2 
375 
150 
3 
450 
200 
 
a.  Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 5.2. 
b.  The ground under the floor is permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of 
the footing. 
c.  Interior-stud-bearing walls are permitted to be supported by isolated footings. The 
footing width and length shall be twice the width shown in this table, and footings 
shall be spaced not more than 1800 mm on center. 
d.  See SBC 304 Chapter 21 for additional requirements for footings of structures 
assigned to Seismic Design Category C or D. 
e.  For thickness of foundation walls, see Chapter 6. 
f.  Footings are permitted to support a roof in addition to the stipulated number of floors. 
Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for supporting one floor. 
 
5.4.2.3  
Placement of concrete. Concrete footings shall not be placed through water 
unless a tremie or other method approved by the building official is used. Where 
placed under or in the presence of water, the concrete shall be deposited by 
approved means to ensure minimum segregation of the mix and negligible 
turbulence of the water. 
5.4.2.4  
Protection of concrete. Water shall not be allowed to flow through the deposited 
concrete. 
5.4.2.5  
Forming of concrete. Concrete footings are permitted to be cast against the earth 
where, in the opinion of the building official, soil conditions do not require 
forming. Where forming is required, it shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of 
SBC 304. 
5.4.2.6  
Minimum concrete cover to reinforcement. When the concrete of footings is 
poured directly on the ground or against excavation walls the minimum concrete 
cover to reinforcement shall not be less than 75 mm. This cover shall also satisfy 
other requirements with regard to concrete exposure conditions presented in SBC 
304. 
5.4.2.7  
Dewatering. Where footings are carried to depths below water level, the footings 
shall be constructed by a method that will provide the depositing or construction of 
sound concrete in the dry. 
 
5.4.3  
Steel grillage footings. Grillage footings of structural steel shapes shall be 
separated with approved steel spacers and be entirely encased in concrete with at 
least 150 mm on the bottom and at least 100 mm at all other points. The spaces 
between the shapes shall be completely filled with concrete or cement grout. 
 
 


--- Page 44 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/6 
 
 
SECTION 5.5 
DESIGNS EMPLOYING LATERAL BEARING 
 
5.5.0 
Designs to resist both axial and lateral loads employing posts or poles as columns 
embedded in earth or embedded in concrete footings in the earth shall conform to 
the requirements of Sections 5.5.1 through 5.5.3. 
 
5.5.1  
Limitations. The design procedures outlined in this section are subject to the 
following limitations:  
1.  The frictional resistance for structural walls and slabs on silts and clays shall 
be limited to one-half of the normal force imposed on the soil by the weight of 
the footing or slab. 
2.  Posts embedded in earth shall not be used to provide lateral support for 
structural or nonstructural materials such as plaster, masonry or concrete 
unless bracing is provided that develops the limited deflection required.  
 
5.5.2  
Design criteria. The depth to resist lateral loads shall be determined by the design 
criteria established in Sections 5.5.2.1 through 5.5.2.3, or by other methods 
approved by the building official. 
5.5.2.1  
Nonconstrained. The following formula shall be used in determining the depth of 
embedment required to resist lateral loads where no constraint is provided at the 
ground surface, such as rigid floor or rigid ground surface pavement, and where no 
lateral constraint is provided above the ground surface, such as a structural 
diaphragm. 
 
}
)]
36
.4
(
1
[
1
{
5.0
2
/
1
A
h
A
d
+
+
=
 
 
(Equation 5-2)  
 
where: 
d      =  Depth of embedment in earth in meter but not over 3600 mm for purpose 
of computing lateral pressure. 
 h     =   Distance in meter from ground surface to point of application of  “ P ”. 
b
S
P
A
1
34
.2
=
       
P      =  Applied lateral force in kN. 
1
S      =  Allowable lateral soil-bearing pressure as set forth in Section 4.3 based on 
a depth of one-third the depth of embedment in kPa. 
b         =  Diameter of round post or footing or diagonal dimension of square post or 
footing, meter. 
5.5.2.2  
Constrained. The following formula shall be used to determine the depth of 
embedment required to resist lateral loads where constraint is provided at the 
ground surface, such as a rigid floor or pavement. 
 
)
(
25
.4
3
2
b
S
Ph
d
=
                                                 (Equation 5-3) 
 
or alternatively 
 
)
(
25
.4
3
2
b
S
M
d
g
=
 
 
 
 
   (Equation 5-4) 


--- Page 45 ---
SPREAD FOOTINGS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
5/7 
 
 
where: 
g
M =  moment in the post at grade, in kN-m. 
3
S   =  Allowable lateral soil-bearing pressure as set forth in Section 4.3 based on a 
depth equal to the depth of embedment in kPa. 
5.5.2.3  
Vertical load. The resistance to vertical loads shall be determined by the 
allowable soil-bearing pressure set forth in Table 4.1. 
 
5.5.3  
Backfill. The backfill in the space around columns not embedded in poured 
footings shall be by one of the following methods: 
1.  Backfill shall be of concrete with compressive strength of 15 MPa at 28 days. 
The hole shall not be less than 100 mm larger than the diameter of the column 
at its bottom or 100 mm larger than the diagonal dimension of a square or 
rectangular column. 
2.  Backfill shall be of clean sand. The sand shall be thoroughly compacted by 
tamping in layers not more than 200 mm in depth.  
3.  Backfill shall be of controlled low-strength material (CLSM) placed in 
accordance with Section 3.11. 
 
SECTION 5.6 
SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS 
 
5.6.0 
For footings of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C or D, provisions 
of SBC 301 and SBC 304 shall apply when not in conflict with the provisions of 
Chapter 5.   
  
 


--- Page 46 ---
FOUNDATION WALL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
6/1 
 
CHAPTER 6 
FOUNDATION WALLS 
 
SECTION 6.1 
GENERAL 
 
6.1.0 
Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall be designed in accordance with SBC 
304 or SBC 305. Foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and 
bottom and within the parameters of Tables 6.1 through 6.3 are permitted to be 
designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 6.2 through 6.6. 
 
SECTION 6.2 
FOUNDATION WALL THICKNESS 
 
6.2.0 
The minimum thickness of concrete and masonry foundation walls shall comply 
with Sections 6.2.1 through 6.2.3.  
 
6.2.1  
Thickness based on walls supported. The thickness of foundation walls shall not 
be less than the thickness of the wall supported, except that foundation walls of at 
least 200 mm nominal width are permitted to support brick-veneered frame walls 
and 250 mm cavity walls provided the requirements of Section 6.2.2 are met. 
Corbelling of masonry shall be in accordance with Section 4.2, SBC 305. Where a 
200 mm wall is corbelled, the top corbel shall be a full course of headers at least 
150 mm in length, extending not higher than the bottom of the floor framing. 
  
TABLE 6.1 
200-mm CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING  
WHERE EFFECTIVE DEPTH d ≥ 125 mma,b,c 
 
WALL 
HEIGHT 
(mm) 
HEIGHT OF 
UNBALANCED 
BACKFILL 
(mm) 
VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
Soil classes and lateral soil loadsa (kPa per meter below natural grade) 
GW, GP, SW and SP 
soils 
(5)
GM, GC, SM, SM-SC 
and ML soils 
(7)
SC, MH, ML-CL and 
Inorganic CL soils 
(9) 
2100 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
2400 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
2400 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 22 at 1000 o.c. 
2700 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
2400 
2700 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 22 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 25 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 22 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 25 at 1200 o.c. 
  Dia 25 at   800 o.c. 
 
a.  
For design lateral soil loads, see SBC 301 Section 5.1. Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification 
System and design lateral soil loads are for moist soil conditions without hydrostatic pressure. 
b.  
Provisions for this table are based on construction requirements specified in Section 6.3. 
c. 
For alternative reinforcement, see Section 6.4. 
 
6.2.2  
Thickness based on soil loads, unbalanced backfill height and wall height. The 
thickness of foundation walls shall comply with the requirements of Table 6.1, 6.2 
or 6.3. When using the tables, masonry shall be laid in running bond and the 
mortar shall be Type M or S.  
 


--- Page 47 ---
FOUNDATION WALL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
6/2 
 
TABLE 6.2 
250-mm CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH  
REINFORCING WHERE EFFECTIVE DEPTH d ≥ 175 mma,b,c 
 
WALL 
HEIGHT 
HEIGHT OF 
UNBALANCED 
BACKFILL 
VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
Soil classes and lateral soil loada (kPa per meter below natural grade)
GW, GP, SW and SP 
soils 
(5)
GM, GC, SM, SM-SC 
and ML soils 
(7)
SC, MH, ML-CL and 
Inorganic CL soils 
(9) 
2100 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
2400 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
2400 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at   800 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 22 at 1400 o.c. 
2700 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
2400 
2700 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at   800 o.c. 
Dia16 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at   800 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at    400 o.c. 
Dia 22 at  1000 o.c. 
 
a.  For design lateral soil loads, see SBC 301 Section 5.1. Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification 
System and design lateral soil loads are for moist soil conditions without hydrostatic pressure. 
b.  Provisions for this table are based on construction requirements specified in Section 6.3. 
c.   For alternative reinforcement, see Section 6.4. 
 
TABLE 6.3 
300-mm CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING  
WHERE EFFECTIVE DEPTH d ≥ 225 mma,b,c 
 
WALL 
HEIGHT 
(mm) 
HEIGHT OF 
UNBALANCED 
BACKFILL 
(mm) 
VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
Soil classes and lateral soil loada (kPa per meter below natural grade)
GW, GP, SW and SP 
soils 
(5)
GM, GC, SM, SM-SC 
and ML soils 
(7)
SC, MH, ML-CL and 
Inorganic CL soils 
(9) 
2100 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1400 o.c. 
2400 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
2400 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at   800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at   800 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1000 o.c. 
2700 
1200 (or less) 
1500 
1800 
2100 
2400 
2700 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1400 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1000 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 22 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1800 o.c. 
Dia 12 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 16 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1600 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1200 o.c. 
Dia 18 at 1000 o.c. 
 
 
a.  
For design lateral soil loads, see SBC 301 Section 5.1. Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil 
Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist soil conditions without hydrostatic pressure. 
b.  
Provisions for this table are based on construction requirements specified in Section 6.3. 
c.  
For alternative reinforcement, see Section 6.4. 
 
Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height of the exterior and interior 
finish ground levels. Where an interior concrete slab is provided, the unbalanced 
backfill height shall be measured from the exterior finish ground level to the top of 
the interior concrete slab. 
 


--- Page 48 ---
FOUNDATION WALL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
6/3 
 
6.2.3  
Rubble stone. Foundation walls of rough or random rubble stone shall not be less 
than 400 mm thick. Rubble stone shall not be used for foundations for structures in 
Seismic Design Category C or D.   
 
SECTION 6.3 
FOUNDATION WALL MATERIALS 
 
6.3.0 
Foundation walls constructed in accordance with Table 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 shall 
comply with the following:  
1.  Vertical reinforcement shall have minimum yield strength of 420 MPa. 
2.  The specified location of the reinforcement shall equal or exceed the effective 
depth distance, d, noted in Tables 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 and shall be measured from 
the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement. The 
reinforcement shall be placed within the tolerances specified in ACI 
530.1/ASCE 6/TMS 402, Article 3.4 B7 of the specified location.  
3.  Concrete shall have a specified compressive strength of not less than 20 MPa 
at 28 days. 
4.  Grout shall have a specified compressive strength of not less than 15 MPa at 
28 days. 
5.  Hollow masonry units shall comply with ASTM C 90 and be installed with 
Type M or S mortar. 
 
SECTION 6.4 
ALTERNATIVE FOUNDATION WALL REINFORCEMENT 
 
 
 
6.4.1 
In lieu of the reinforcement provisions in Table 6.1, 6.2 or 6.3, alternative 
reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of 
reinforcement per linear meter of wall are permitted to be used, provided the 
spacing of reinforcement does not exceed 1.8 m and reinforcing bar sizes do not 
exceed Dia 36 mm. 
 
SECTION 6.5 
HOLLOW MASONRY WALLS 
 
6.5.1 
At least 100 mm of solid masonry shall be provided at girder supports at the top of 
hollow masonry unit foundation walls. 
 
SECTION 6.6 
SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS 
 
6.6.0 
Tables 6.1 through 6.3 shall be subject to the following limitations in Sections 
6.6.1 and 6.6.2 based on the seismic design category assigned to the structure as 
defined in Chapters 9 through 16 of SBC 301. 
 
6.6.1  
Seismic requirements for concrete foundation walls. Concrete foundation walls 
designed using Tables 6.1 through 6.3 shall be subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Seismic Design Categories A and B. No limitations, except provide not less 
than two Dia 16 mm bars around window and door openings. Such bars shall 
extend at least 600 mm beyond the corners of the openings. 


--- Page 49 ---
FOUNDATION WALL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
6/4 
 
 
6.6.2  
Seismic requirements for masonry foundation walls. Masonry foundation walls 
designed using Tables 6.1 through 6.3 shall be subject to the following limitations:  
1.  Seismic Design Categories A and B. No additional seismic requirements. 
2.  Seismic Design Category C. A design using Tables 6.1 through 6.3 subject to 
the seismic requirements of Section 6.1.4 SBC 305. 
3.  Seismic Design Category D. A design using Tables 6.1 through 6.3 subject to 
the seismic requirements of Section 6.1.5 SBC 305. 
 
SECTION 6.7 
FOUNDATION WALL DRAINAGE 
 
6.7.1 
Foundation walls shall be designed to support the weight of the full hydrostatic 
pressure of undrained backfill unless a drainage system is installed in accordance 
with Sections 13.4.2 and 13.4.3. 
 
SECTION 6.8 
PIER AND CURTAIN WALL FOUNDATIONS 
 
6.8.1 
Except in Seismic Design Category D, pier and curtain wall foundations are 
permitted to be used to support light-frame construction not more than two stories 
in height, provided the following requirements are met: 
1.  All load-bearing walls shall be placed on continuous concrete footings 
bonded integrally with the exterior wall footings. 
2.  The minimum actual thickness of a load-bearing masonry wall shall not be 
less than 100 mm nominal or 90 mm actual thickness, and shall be bonded 
integrally with piers spaced 1800 mm on center (o.c.). 
3.  Piers shall be constructed in accordance with SBC 305 and the following: 
a) The unsupported height of the masonry piers shall not exceed 10 times 
their least dimension. 
b) Where structural clay tile or hollow concrete masonry units are used for 
piers supporting beams and girders, the cellular spaces shall be filled 
solidly with concrete or Type M or S mortar. 
Exception: Unfilled hollow piers are permitted where the unsupported 
height of the pier is not more than four times its least dimension.  
c) Hollow piers shall be capped with 100 mm of solid masonry or concrete 
or the cavities of the top course shall be filled with concrete or grout. 
4.  The unbalanced fill for 100 mm foundation walls shall not exceed 600 mm 
for solid masonry, and 300 mm for hollow masonry. 
 
SECTION 6.9 
SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS 
 
6.9.1 
For foundations of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C or D, 
provisions of SBC 301 and SBC 304 shall apply when not in conflict with the 
provisions of Chapter 6.   


--- Page 50 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/1 
 
CHAPTER 7 
RETAINING WALLS 
 
SECTION 7.1 
GENERAL 
 
7.1.1 
SCOPE. This Chapter shall apply to all matters pertaining to design and 
construction of rigid gravity, semi gravity, cantilever, buttressed, and counterfort 
retaining walls. For special types of retaining walls, provisions of this code shall 
apply where applicable. General safeguards during construction shall comply with 
provisions of Chapter 3. 
 
SECTION 7.2 
LATERAL EARTH PRESSURES 
 
7.2.0 
Computations of lateral earth pressures shall comply with the provisions of 
Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.6. Wall movements set forth in Table 7.1 shall be 
considered the magnitude required for active and passive conditions to exist. Soil 
permeability characteristics, boundary drainage and loading conditions, and time 
shall be considered in selection of strength parameters. In soils where partial 
drainage occurs during the time of construction, analysis shall be performed for 
short-term and long-term conditions, and the wall shall be designed for the worse 
conditions.  
 
7.2.1  
Wall friction. Wall friction and vertical movement, slope of the wall in the 
backside and sloping backfill shall be considered in determining the lateral 
pressures applied against the wall. Unless data to substantiate the use of other 
values are submitted and approved by a registered design professional, the values 
set forth in Tables 7-2 and 7-3 shall be used in computations that include effects of 
wall friction.  
 
TABLE 7.1 
MAGNITUDE OF ROTATION TO REACH FAILURE 
 
SOIL TYPE AND CONDITION 
ROTATION 
a)
H
(δ
 
ACTIVE 
PASSIVE 
Dense cohesionless soil 
0.0005
0.002 
Loose cohesionless soil 
0.002 
0.006 
Stiff cohesive soil 
0.01 
0.02 
Soft cohesive soil 
0.02 
0.04 
a. δ  = Horizontal translation at the top of the wall. 
 
  
   H  = Height of the wall 
 
TABLE 7.2 
ULTIMATE FRICTION FACTORS FOR DISSIMILAR MATERIALS 
 
INTERFACE MATERIALS 
FRICTION FACTOR, tan δ a 
Clean sound rock 
0.7 
Clean gravel, gravel-sand mixtures, coarse sand 
0.55 - 0.60 
Clean fine to medium sand, silty medium to coarse sand, 
silty or clayey gravel 
0.45 –  0.55 
Clean fine sand, silty or clayey fine to medium sand 
0.35 –  0.45 
Fine sandy silt, nonplastic silt 
0.30 –  0.35 
Very stiff and hard residual or preconsolidated clay 
0.40 - 0.50 
Medium stiff and stiff clay and silty clay 
0.30 – 0.35 
a. Values for δ shall not exceed one-half the angle of internal friction of the backfill soils for steel and precast concrete and            
two-third  the angle of internal friction of the backfill soils for cast-in place concrete. 


--- Page 51 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/2 
 
 
7.2.2  
Wall movement. The effect of wall movement on the earth pressure coefficients 
shall conform to the provisions of Sections 7.2.2.1 and 7.2.2.2. 
7.2.2.1  
Rotation. If the wall is free at the top and there are no other structures associated 
with, wall tilting shall not exceed 0.1 times the height of the wall. Where the actual 
estimated wall rotation is less than the value required to fully mobilize active or 
passive conditions set forth in Table 7-1, the earth pressure coefficient shall be 
adjusted in accordance with Figure 7.1.  
 
TABLE 7.3 
ULTIMATE ADHESION FOR DISSIMILAR MATERIALS 
 
INTERFACE MATERIALS 
COHESION 
(kPa) 
ADHESION 
(kPa) 
Very soft cohesive soil 
0 - 10 
0 - 10 
Soft cohesive soil 
10 - 25 
10 - 25 
Medium stiff cohesive soil 
25 - 50 
25 - 35 
Stiff cohesive soil 
50 - 100 
35 - 45 
Very stiff cohesive soil 
100 - 200 
45 - 60 
 
7.2.2.2  
Translation. It shall be permitted to consider uniform translation required to 
mobilize ultimate passive resistance or active pressure equivalent to movement of 
top of wall based on rotation given in Table 7.1. 
 
FIGURE 7.1  
EFFECT OF WALL MOVEMENT ON WALL PRESSURES (NAFAC, 1986) 
 


--- Page 52 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/3 
 
7.2.2.3  
Restrained wall. Where wall is prevented from even slight movement, the earth 
pressure shall be considered to remain at rest conditions. 
7.2.2.4  
Basement and other below grade walls. Pressures on walls below grade shall be 
computed based on restrained conditions that prevail, type of backfill, and the 
amount of compaction. The provisions of Chapter 6 shall apply where applicable. 
7.2.2.5  
Wall on rock. Where the wall is founded on rock, sufficient rotation of the base 
and wall so that active pressure is developed, shall be accomplished by placing 
150 to 300 mm thick earth pad beneath the base and by constructing the stem with 
sufficient flexibility to yield with the soil pressure. 
 
7.2.3  
Groundwater conditions. Pressure computations shall include uplift pressures 
and the effect of the greatest unbalanced water head anticipated to act across the 
wall. For cohesionless materials, increase in lateral force on wall due to rainfall 
shall be considered and walls shall be designed to support the weight of the full 
hydrostatic pressure of undrained backfill unless a drainage system is installed in 
accordance with Sections 13.4.2 and 13.4.3. 
 
7.2.4  
Surcharge. Stability shall be checked with and without surcharge. Lateral pressure 
on wall due to point and line loads shall be computed based on the assumption of 
an unyielding rigid wall and the lateral pressures are set equal to double the values 
obtained by elastic equations. The applicability of the assumption of an unyielding 
rigid wall shall be evaluated for each specific wall.  
For uniform surcharge loading it shall be permitted to compute lateral stress by 
treating the surcharge as if it were backfill and multiplying the vertical stress at 
any depth by the appropriate earth pressure coefficient. It shall be permitted for 
design purposes to considerer a distributed surface load surcharge on the order of 
15 kPa to account for construction materials and equipment stored within 5 to 10 
meters from the wall. Where construction equipment is anticipated within 2 meters 
of the wall, it must be accounted for separately.  
 
7.2.5  
Compaction. For backfill of granular soils compacted in a confined wedge behind 
the wall, the horizontal pressure beyond those represented by active or at-rest 
values shall be computed in accordance with Figure 7.2. 
Compaction-induced pressures shall not be considered in bearing, overturning and 
sliding analyses and need only be considered for structural design. Backfill shall 
be brought up equally on both sides until the lower side finished grade is reached 
and precautions shall be taken to prevent overcompaction which will cause 
excessive lateral forces to be applied to the wall. 
Clays and other fine-grained soils, as well as granular soils, with amount of clay 
and silt greater than 15 percent shall not be used as a backfill behind retaining 
wall. Where they must be used, the lateral earth pressure shall be calculated based 
on at-rest conditions, with due consideration to potential poor drainage conditions 
and swelling. Where loose hydraulic fill is used it shall be placed by procedures 
which permit runoff of wash water and prevent building up of large hydrostatic 
pressures.  
 


--- Page 53 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/4 
 
 
FIGURE 7.2 
HORIZONTAL PRESSURE ON WALLS FROM COMPACTION EFFORT (NAFAC, 1986) 
 
7.2.6  
Earthquake loading. For retaining walls assigned to Seismic Design Category C 
or D, provisions of SBC 301 and SBC 304 shall apply when not in conflict with 
the provisions of Chapter 7.    
The combined resultant active force due to initial static pressure and increase in 
pressure from ground motion shall be computed from the following formula 
θ
ψ
θ
θ
β
γ
2
*
2
*
*
2
cos
cos
cos
)
1
)(
,
(
2
1
v
A
AE
k
k
H
P
−
=
                       (Equation 7-1)  
where: 
AE
P
= Combined resultant active force. 
H   =  Wall height. 
θ    =  Slope of wall back with respect to vertical 
β    =  Inclination of soil surface (upward slopes away from the wall are positives). 
θ *  =  
)
(
ψ
θ +
= Modified slope of wall back. 
β *  =  
)
(
ψ
β +
= Modified inclination of soil surface. 
γ   =  unit weight of soil. 
ψ    =  seismic inertia angle given as follows 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
−
v
h
k
k
1
tan 1
ψ
                                               (Equation 7-2) 
where:  


--- Page 54 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/5 
 
h
k = Horizontal ground acceleration in g’s. 
vk  = Vertical ground acceleration in g’s. 
For modified slope angle β *
 and θ *, the modified coefficient of earth pressures 
A
k (β *,θ *) shall be calculated from the Coulomb theory. Dynamic pressure 
increment shall be obtained by subtracting static active force (to be determined 
from Coulomb theory for given β  and θ ) from combined active force given by 
Equation 7-1. Location of resultant shall be obtained by considering the earth 
pressure to be composed of a static and dynamic component with the static 
component acts at the lowest third point, whereas the dynamic component acts 
above the base at 0.6 times the height of the wall. Under the combined effect of 
static and earthquake load the factor of safety shall not be less than 1.2. 
Where soil is below water, the hydrodynamic pressure computed from the 
following formula shall be added 
2
/
1)
(
2
3
z
h
k
p
w
w
h
wz
γ
=
                                    (Equation 7-3) 
where: 
wz
p
  =  Hydrodynamic pressure at depth z below water surface 
w
h  =  Height of water 
z  
=  Depth below the water surface. 
w
γ  =  Unit weight of water. 
 
SECTION 7.3 
BEARING CAPACITY 
 
7.3.1 
The allowable soil pressure shall be determined in accordance with the provisions 
of Chapter 4. The determination of the allowable bearing pressure shall be made 
according to the bearing capacity of a foundation subjected to eccentric loads. The 
bearing capacity shall be checked for the same loading conditions as determined 
by the overturning analysis for each case analyzed. Where the wall is founded on 
sloped ground, methods for determination of ultimate bearing capacity that deal 
with this situation shall be used. The factor of safety with respect to bearing 
capacity shall not be less than 3.  
For walls founded on rocks, high toe pressure that may cause breaking the toe 
from the remainder of the base shall be avoided by proportioning the footing so 
that the resultant falls near its center. 
 
SECTION 7.4 
STABILITY 
 
7.4.0 
Retaining walls shall be designed to ensure stability against overturning, sliding, 
and stability of supporting ground. Stability analyses shall conform to the 
provisions of Sections 7.4.1 through 7.4.4.   
 
7.4.1  
Sliding stability. The base shall be at least 1000 mm below ground surface in 
front of the wall. Sliding stability shall be adequate without including passive 
pressure at the toe. Where insufficient sliding resistance is available, one provision 
shall be taken including, but need not be limited to, increasing the width of the 


--- Page 55 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/6 
 
wall base, founding the wall on piles or lowering the base of the wall. If the wall is 
supported by rock or very stiff clay, it shall be permitted to install a key below the 
foundation to provide additional resistance to sliding. The key shall conform to the 
provisions of Section 7.4.4. The factor of safety against sliding shall not be less 
than 1.5 for cohesionless backfill and 2.0 for cohesive backfill. 
 
7.4.2  
Overturning stability. For walls on relatively incompressible foundations, 
overturning check is ignored if the resultant is within the middle third of the base 
for walls founded on soils and if the resultant is within the middle half for walls 
founded on rocks. Where foundation is compressible settlement shall be computed 
based on any method approved by the building official. Tilt of rigid wall shall be 
obtained from the estimated settlement. Differential settlement shall be limited to 
the amount of tilting that shall not exceed 5 percent of wall height. If the 
consequent tilt exceeds acceptable limits, the wall shall be proportioned to keep 
the resultant force at the middle third of base. The retaining wall shall be 
proportioned so that the factor of safety against overturning is not less than 1.5. 
The value of angular distortion (settlement/length of structure) of retaining walls 
shall not exceed 0.002 radians. 
 
7.4.3  
Deep-seated sliding. Where retaining walls are underlain by weak soils, the 
overall stability of the soil mass containing the retaining wall shall be checked 
with respect to the most critical surface of sliding. The stability analysis shall be 
made for after construction and for long-term conditions. The factor of safety for 
the overall stability of the soil mass containing the wall shall not be less than 2. 
 
7.4.4  
Wall with key. Prior to performing an overturning analysis, the depth of the key 
and width of the base shall be determined from the sliding stability analysis. For a 
wall with a horizontal base and a key, it shall be permitted to assume the shearing 
resistance of the base to be zero and the horizontal resisting force acting on the key 
is that required for equilibrium. For a wall with a sloping base and a key, the 
horizontal force required for equilibrium shall be assumed to act on the base and 
the key In both cases the resisting soil force down to the bottom of the toe shall be 
computed using at-rest earth pressure if the material on the resisting side will not 
lose its resistance characteristics with any probable change in water content or 
environmental conditions and will not be eroded or excavated during the life of the 
wall.  
 
SECTION 7.5 
WALL DIMENSIONS 
 
7.5.1 
Thickness of the upper part of the wall shall not be less than 300 mm, where as 
thickness of the lower part of the wall shall be enough to resist shear without 
reinforcement. Depth of wall foundation shall be located below line of seasonal 
changes and shall be deep enough to provide adequate bearing capacity and soil 
sliding resistance. The wall foundation shall be proportioned such that the wall 
does not slide or overturn, the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is not 
exceeded, and that total and differential settlements are tolerable. The base and 
other dimensions shall be such that the resultant falls within the middle third of the 
base. Where additional front clearance is needed, it shall be permitted to construct 
counterfort retaining walls without a toe provided that the sliding and overturning 
stability requirements stated in Sections 7.4.1 and 7.4.2 are met. 


--- Page 56 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/7 
 
 
 
SECTION 7.6 
WALL CONSTRUCTION 
 
7.6.0 
Concrete shall not be placed through water unless a tremie or other method 
approved by the building official is used. Where placed under or in the presence of 
water, the concrete shall be deposited by approved means to ensure minimum 
segregation of the mix and negligible turbulence of the water and that will provide 
the depositing or construction of sound concrete in the dry. 
7.6.1  
Minimum concrete cover to reinforcement. When the concrete of retaining 
walls is poured directly on the ground or against excavation walls the minimum 
concrete cover to reinforcement shall not be less than 75 mm and not less than 40 
mm when concrete is poured against lean concrete or vertical forms. This cover 
shall also satisfy other requirements with regard to concrete exposure conditions 
presented in SBC 304. 
 
7.6.2  
Joints. Construction and expansion joints shall be provided where needed. 
Construction joints shall be constructed into a retaining wall between successive 
pours of concrete both horizontally and vertically. Horizontal construction joints 
shall be kept to a minimum and the top surface of each lift shall be cleaned and 
roughened before placing the next lift. Long walls shall have expansion joints at 
intervals of 10 meters. Where vertical-expansion joints are considered, they shall 
be placed along the wall at spacing of 20 to 30 meters. Reinforcing steel and other 
fixed metal embedded or bonded to the surface of the concrete shall not extend 
through the expansion joint. For cantilever concrete walls, it shall be permitted to 
locate the vertical expansion joints only on the stem, and the footing is a 
continuous placement.  
The thickness of joint filler necessary to provide stress relief at a joint shall be 
determined from the estimated initial contraction and subsequent expansion from 
maximum temperature variation.  
 
7.6.3  
Drainage. Regardless of the drainage system used, the wall must have an adequate 
factor of safety assuming the drainage system is inoperative. Where drainage 
measures are considered they shall be designed by a registered design professional 
and subject to the approval of the building official. As a minimum, there shall be 
weep holes with pockets of coarse-grained material at the back of the wall, and a 
gutter shall be provided for collecting runoff. All retaining walls shall have 
adequate surface drainage to dispose of surface water. A layer of impervious soil 
shall be placed on top of the soil backfill to reduce surface infiltration of rainfall. It 
shall be permitted to use inclined and horizontal drains in conjunction with back 
drain. 
The weep holes shall be of sufficient size and be carefully surrounded with a 
granular filter or by the use of filter fabric on the backfill side and directly 
surrounding the entrance to the weep holes. The weep holes shall be spaced not 
more than 3 m apart vertically and horizontally. Where longitudinal drains along 
the back face are used, a layer of free-draining granular material shall be placed 
along the back of the wall and surrounding the drain pipes opening. The gradation 
of the filter shall satisfy the following piping or stability criterion. 
 


--- Page 57 ---
RETAINING WALLS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
7/8 
 
5
 
  
85
F
15
≤
B
d
d
                                                                 (Equation 7-4) 
where:  
F
d15 = size of filter material at 15 percent passing. 
B
d85 = size of protected soil at 85 percent passing. 
and 
25
B
50
F
50
≤
d
d
                                                                (Equation 7-5) 
where: 
F
d50 = size of filter material at 50 percent passing. 
B
d50 = size of protected soil at 50 percent passing. 
The filter material shall be more permeable than the material being drained and the 
following condition shall be met 
 
20
 
4
B
15
F
15
<
< d
d
                                                            (Equation 7-6) 
 
where:  
B
d15  = size of filter protected soil at 15 percent passing. 
Where a blanket of well-graded sand and gravel that is placed along the back of 
the wall it shall satisfied the requirements of Equations 7-4 through 7-6. Where 
longitudinal drains are used within drainage blanket, they shall be large enough to 
carry the discharge and have adequate slope to provide sufficient velocity to 
remove sediment from the drain. Segregation of sand and gravel during 
construction shall be avoided. Filter or drain materials contaminated by muddy 
water, dust, etc. shall be replaced and filter materials subject to cementation shall 
be rejected. 
In lieu of a granular filter, it shall be permitted to use prefabricated geocomposite 
drains with adequate filter flow capacity and acceptable retention. The size of filter 
material at 50 percent passing, 
F
d50 , shall not be less than the diameter of the hole 
for circular openings and shall be 1.2 times slot width for slotted openings. The 
drainage composite manufacture’s recommendations for backfilling and 
compaction near the composite shall be followed.  
  


--- Page 58 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/1 
 
CHAPTER 8 
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS 
 
SECTION 8.1 
GENERAL 
 
8.1.0 
Analysis and design of combined footings and mats shall conform to all 
requirements of ACI 336.2R  Suggested Analysis and Design Procedures for 
Combined Footings and Mats except as modified by Chapter 8. All provisions of 
SBC 303 not specifically excluded, and not in conflict with the provisions of 
Chapter 8 shall apply to combined footings and mats, where applicable. Design of 
combined or mat foundations shall be based on the Strength Design Method of 
SBC 304.  
Combined footings and mats shall be designed and constructed on the basis of a 
site investigation as defined in Chapter 2, unless the building official ascertains 
that sufficient data upon which to base the design and installation is available. The 
investigation and report provisions of Chapter 2 shall be expanded to include, but 
need not be limited to, the following: 
1. Values for modulus of subgrade reaction. 
2. Recommended combined footings shapes. 
 
8.1.1  
Approval of special systems of design or construction. Sponsors of any system 
of design or construction within the scope of Chapter 8, the adequacy of which has 
been shown by successful use or by analysis or test, but which does not conform to 
or is not covered by Chapter 8, shall have the right to present that data on which 
their design is based to the building official or to a board of examiners appointed 
by the building official. This board shall be composed of competent geotechnical 
and structural engineers and shall have authority to investigate the data so 
submitted, to require tests, and to formulate rules governing design and 
construction of such systems to meet the intent of Chapter 8. These rules when 
approved by the building official and promulgated shall be of the same force as the 
provisions of Chapter 8. 
 
SECTION 8.2 
LOADINGS 
 
8.2.1 
Combined footings and mats shall be designed for the most unfavorable effects 
due to the combinations of loads specified in SBC 301 Section 2.4. The dead load 
shall include the weight of foundations, footings and overlying fill. Reduced live 
loads, as specified in Section 4.8 SBC 301, are permitted to be used in designing 
footings. Strength design of reinforced concrete systems and elements shall 
comply with load combinations specified in SBC 304. 
 
SECTION 8.3 
CONCRETE 
 
8.3.1 
Material, construction, and placement of concrete shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 5.4.2. For mats construction joints shall be carefully located 
at sections of low shear stress or at the center lines between columns. An elapse of 


--- Page 59 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/2 
 
at least 24 hours shall be left between pours of adjacent areas. If bar splicing is 
needed, sufficient overlapping shall be provided. The concrete shall be strong 
enough to transfer the shear stress across the joint. If necessary, the mat may be 
thickened to provide sufficient strength in the joints. 
 
SECTION 8.4 
CONTACT PRESSURE 
 
8.4.0 
Soil contact pressure acting on a combined footing or mat and the internal stresses 
produced by them shall be determined from one of the load combinations given in 
Section 2.4 SBC 301, whichever produces the maximum value for the element 
under investigation.  
The combinations of unfactored loads which will produce the greatest contact 
pressure on a base area of given shape and size shall be selected. The allowable 
soil pressure shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4. 
Loads shall include the vertical effects of moments caused by horizontal 
components of these forces and by eccentrically applied vertical loads. Buoyancy 
of submerged parts where this reduces the factor of safety or increases the contact 
pressures, as in flood conditions shall be considered.  
The maximum unfactored design contact pressures shall not exceed the allowable 
soil pressure as obtained from Chapter 4 or cause settlements that exceed the 
values set forth in Table 5.1 and 8.3. Where wind or earthquake forces form a part 
of the load combination, the allowable soil pressure may be increased as allowed 
by the Saudi Building Code or approved by the building official.   
In determination of the contact pressures and associated subgrade response, the 
validity of simplifying assumptions and the accuracy of any resulting 
computations shall be approved by the building official and evaluated on the basis 
of the following variables: 
1. The increased unit pressures developed along the edges of rigid footings on 
cohesive soils and at the center for rigid footings on cohesionless soils.  
2. The effect of embedment of the footing on pressure variation. 
3. Consideration in the analysis of the behavior of the foundations immediately 
after the structure is built as well as the effects of long-term consolidation of 
deep soil layers. 
4. Consideration of size of the footing in determination of the modulus of 
subgrade reaction of soil.  
5. The variation of contact pressures from eccentric loading conditions. 
6. Consideration of the influence of the stiffness of the footing and the 
superstructure on deformations that can occur at the contact surface and the 
corresponding variation on contact pressure and redistribution of reactions 
occurring within the superstructure frame.  
 
8.4.1  
Distribution of soil reactions. Contact pressures at the base of combined footings 
and mats shall be determined in accordance with Sections 8.4.1.1 through 8.4.1.3. 
8.4.1.1  
General. Except for unusual conditions, the contact pressures at the base of a 
combined footings and mats may be assumed to follow either a distribution 
governed by elastic subgrade reaction or a straight-line distribution. At no place 


--- Page 60 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/3 
 
shall the calculated contact pressure exceed the allowable bearing capacity as 
determined from Chapter 4.  
8.4.1.2  
Straight-line distribution of contact pressure. It shall be permitted to assume a 
linear distribution for soil contact pressure if continuous footings meet the 
requirement of Section 8.7.1 and mats conform to the requirements of Section 
8.9.3.2. 
8.4.1.2.1  
Contact pressure over total base area. If the resultant of all forces is such that all 
portions of the foundation contact area are in compression, the maximum and 
minimum soil pressure may then be calculated from the following formula, which 
applies only to the rectangular base areas and only when eccentricity is located 
along one of the principal axes of the footing 
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛±
= ∑
L
e
BL
P
q
6
1
min
max,
   
 
 
 
(Equation 8-1) 
where: 
qmax  
=   Maximum soil contact pressure. 
qmin  
=   Minimum soil contact pressure. 
P  
=   Any force acting perpendicular to base area. 
B  
=   Foundation width or width of beam column element. 
e      =  Eccentricity of resultant of all vertical forces with center of footing area (e 
≤ L/6). 
L  
=   Foundation base length or length of beam column element. 
 
For footings with eccentricity about both axes, soil pressure is obtained from 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
±
±
= ∑
B
e
L
e
BL
P
q
y
x
6
6
1
 
 
 
 
(Equation 8-2) 
where: 
q  =  Soil contact pressure. 
ex  =  Eccentricity of resultant of all vertical forces with respect to the x-axis. 
ey  =  Eccentricity of resultant of all vertical forces with respect to the y-axis. 
P  =  Any force acting perpendicular to base area. 
8.4.1.2.2  
Contact pressure over part of area. The soil pressure distribution shall be 
assumed to be triangular and the resultant has the same magnitude and colinear, 
but acts in the opposite direction of the resultant of the applied forces.  
The maximum soil pressure at the footing edge under this condition shall be 
calculated from the following expression 
 
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
e
L
B
P
qult
2
3
2
     
 
 
 
(Equation 8-3) 
 
The minimum soil pressure at distance L1 is set equal to zero, where L1 is the 
footing effective length measured from the pressed edge to the position at which 
the contact pressure is zero and is given by 
 
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
e
L
L
2
3
1
  
 
 
 
 
(Equation 8-4) 
 


--- Page 61 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/4 
 
Equations 8-3 and 8-4 are applied based on the assumption that no tensile stresses 
exist between footing and soil and for cases where the resultant force falls out of 
the middle third of the base. 
8.4.1.3  
Distribution of contact pressure governed by the modulus of subgrade 
reaction. It shall be permitted to get the distribution of contact pressure based on 
modulus of subgrade reaction obtained from Section 8.4.1.3.2. The thickness shall 
be sized for shear without using reinforcement. The flexural steel is then obtained 
by assuming a linear soil pressure distribution and using simplified procedures in 
which the foundation satisfies static equilibrium. The flexural steel may also be 
obtained by assuming that the foundation is an elastic member interacting with an 
elastic soil.  
8.4.1.3.1  
Beams on elastic foundations. If the combined footing is assumed to be a flexible 
slab, it may be analyzed as a beam on elastic foundation. It shall be permitted to 
analyze a beam on elastic foundation using the discrete element method, the finite 
element method, or other methods approved by the building official. 
8.4.1.3.2  
Estimating the modulus of subgrade reaction. The value for modulus of 
subgrade reaction may be obtained from one of the methods in Sections 8.4.1.3.2.1 
through 8.4.1.3.2.3. It shall be permitted to use a constant value for the modulus of 
subgrade reaction except where the rigidity of the footing and superstructure is 
considered small, the decrease in the value of modulus of subgrade reaction, 
sk , 
with increasing applied load shall be taken into consideration. 
8.4.1.3.2.1   Presumptive modulus of subgrade reaction values. It shall be permitted to use 
values for the modulus of subgrade reaction for supporting soils as set forth in 
Table 8.1 and 8.2 to determine about the correct order of magnitude of the 
subgrade modulus obtained from Sections 8.4.1.3.2.1 through 8.4.1.3.2.5. The 
tables’ values shall be used only as a representative guide. 
8.4.1.3.2.2   Modulus of subgrade reaction from plate load test. For mat foundations, this 
soil property shall not be estimated on the basis of field plate load tests and shall 
be obtained using subgrade reaction theory, but shall be modified to individually 
consider dead loading, live loading, size effects, and the associated subgrade 
response. Zones of different constant subgrade moduli shall be considered to 
provide a more accurate estimate of the subgrade response as compared to that 
predicted by a single modulus of subgrade reaction.  
 
TABLE 8.1 
PRESUMPTIVE MODULUS OF SUBGRADE REACTION VALUES FOR  
COHESIONLESS SOILS 
 
RELATIVE 
DENSITY 
UNCORRECTED SPT 
VALUES 
MODULUS OF SUBGRADE REACTION (kN/m3) 
DRY AND MOIST 
SOILS 
SUBMERGED SOILS 
Loose 
Less Than 10 
15000 
10000 
Medium dense 
10-30 
45000 
30000 
Dense 
>  30 
175000 
100000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 62 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/5 
 
TABLE 8.2 
PRESUMPTIVE MODULUS OF SUBGRADE REACTION  
VALUES FOR COHESIVE SOILS 
CONSISTENCY 
SHEAR STRENGTH FROM 
UNCONFINED 
COMPRESSION TEST (kPa) 
MODULUS OF 
SUBGRADE REACTION 
(kN/m3) 
Stiff 
105-215 
25000 
Very stiff 
215-430 
50000 
Rigid 
>  430 
100000 
 
The value for the modulus of subgrade reaction for use in elastic foundation 
analysis may be estimates from a plate load test carried out in accordance with 
ASTM D1194. Since plate load tests are of necessity on small plates, great care 
must be exercised to insure that results are properly extrapolated. The modulus of 
subgrade reaction from plate load test shall be converted to that of mat using the 
following formula 
n
m
p
p
s
B
B
k
k
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
=
      
 
 
 
 
(Equation 8-5) 
 
where: 
sk        =  Coefficient (or modulus) of vertical subgrade reaction; generic term 
dependent on dimensions of loaded area. 
p
k        =  Coefficient of subgrade reaction from a plate load test. 
m
B      =  Mat width. 
p
B       =  Plate width. 
 n        =  Factor that ranges from 0.5 to 0.7.  
 
Allowance shall be made for the depth of compressible strata beneath the mat and 
if it is less than about four times the width of footing, lower values shall be used 
for n. 
8.4.1.3.2.3 Modulus of subgrade reaction from elastic parameters. It shall be permitted to 
estimate the value for the modulus of subgrade reaction based on laboratory or in 
situ tests to determine the elastic parameters of the foundation material. This shall 
be done by numerically integrating the strain over the depth of influence to obtain 
a settlement H
∆
 and back computing 
sk  as 
 
H
q
ks
∆
=
                                                   
 
(Equation 8-6) 
 
where: 
q     = Applied pressure. 
H
∆
= Settlement. 
Several values of strain shall be used in the influence depth of approximately four 
times the largest dimension of the base.  
It shall be permitted to estimate the modulus of subgrade reaction based on 
laboratory measured modulus of elasticity such that 
 


--- Page 63 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/6 
 
)
1(
2
ν
−
=
B
E
k
s
s
                                            
 
(Equation 8-7) 
 
where: 
ν   = Poisons ratio for soil. 
s
E = Modulus of Elasticity for soil. 
8.4.1.3.2.4 Modulus of subgrade reaction from load bearing. In the absence of a more 
rigorous data, it shall be permitted to consider a value for the modulus of subgrade 
reaction equal to 120 times the allowable load bearing. The value for 
sk  shall be 
verified from in situ tests in case of sensitive and important structures. 
8.4.1.3.2.5 Time-dependent subgrade response. Consideration shall be given to the time-
dependent subgrade response to the loading conditions. An iterative procedure 
may be necessary to compare the mat deflections with computed soil response. 
Since the soil response profile is based on contact stresses which are in turn based 
on mat loads, flexibility, and modulus of subgrade reaction, iterations shall be 
made until the computed mat deflection and soil response converge within 
acceptable tolerance.  
SECTION 8.5 
SETTLEMENT 
 
8.5.0  
Settlements of combined footings and mats shall conform to the provisions of 
Sections 8.5.1 through 8.5.3. 
 
8.5.1  
General. The combinations of unfactored loads which will produce the greatest 
settlement or deformation of the foundation, occurring either during and 
immediately after the load application or at a later date, shall be selected. Loadings 
at various stages of construction such as dead load or related internal moments and 
forces, stage dead load consisting of the unfactored dead load of the structure and 
foundation at a particular time or stage of construction, and stage service live load 
consisting of the sum of all unfactored live loads at a particular stage of 
construction, shall be evaluated to determine the initial settlement, long-term 
settlement due to consolidation, and differential settlement of the foundation.  
 
8.5.2  
Total settlements. Total settlement of combined footings and mats shall not 
exceed the value set forth in Table 5.1.  
 
8.5.3  
Differential settlement. Differential settlements for combined footings shall not 
exceed the values set forth in Table 5.2. For mats the differential settlement shall 
be taken as three-fourths the total settlement if this is not more than 50 mm or 
determined based on relative stiffness, 
rk , as shown in Table 8.3. 
 
 
SECTION 8.6 
COMBINED FOOTINGS 
 
8.6.0  
Combined footings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 
8.6.1 through 8.6.3. 
8.6.1  
Rectangular-shaped footings. The length and width of rectangular-shaped 
footings shall be established such that the maximum contact pressure at no place 


--- Page 64 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/7 
 
exceeds the allowable soil pressure as obtained from Chapter 4. All moments shall 
be calculated about the centeroid of the footing area and the bottom of the footing. 
All footing dimension shall be computed on the assumption that the footing acts as 
a rigid body.  
 
TABLE 8.3 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DIFFERENTIAL SETTLEMENTS OF MATS 
 
rk
 
SHAPE 
DIFFERENTIAL 
SETTLEMENT (mm) 
0 
Rectangular base 
0.5
a
H
∆
×
 
Square base 
0.35
H
∆
×
 
0.5 
 
0.1
H
∆
×
 
5.0
>
 
Rigid mat: no differential settlement 
 
a. 
H
∆
 = Total settlement estimated based on approved methods of analysis 
but shall not exceed values in Table 5.1. 
 
When the resultant of the columns load, including consideration of the moments 
from lateral forces, coincides with centeroid of the footing area, it shall be 
permitted to assume that the contact pressure is uniform over the entire area of the 
footing. The resultant of the load of the two columns shall not fall outside the 
middle third of the footing. In case where this provision cannot be fulfilled the 
contact pressure may be assumed to follow a linear distribution such that it varies 
from a maximum at the pressed edge to a minimum either beneath the footing or at 
the opposite edge to zero at a distance that is equal three times the distance 
between the point of action of the resultant of loads and the pressed edge.. 
Consideration shall be given to horizontal forces that can generate vertical 
components to the foundation due, but need not be limited to, wind, earth pressure, 
and unbalanced hydrostatic pressure. A careful examination of the free body must 
be made with the geotechnical engineer to fully define the force systems acting on 
the foundation before the structural analyses are attempted. 
 
8.6.2  
Trapezoidal or irregularly shaped footings. For reducing eccentric loading 
conditions, it shall be permitted to design a trapezoidal or irregularly shaped 
footing with the footing considered to act as a rigid body and the contact pressure 
determined in accordance with Section 8.4. 
 
8.6.3  
Strap footings. The strap shall be rigid enough to avoid rotation of the exterior 
footing and the footings shall be proportioned for approximately equal soil 
pressure. A large difference in footing width shall be avoided to reduce differential 
settlement. It shall be permitted to consider the strap to be rigid if it has a moment 
of inertia that is not less than four times that of the footing to which it is attached. 
The width of the strap shall be equal to the smallest column width.  
Shear reinforcement in the strap shall not be used to increase rigidity. If the depth 
of footing is restricted, the depth of the strap may be increased to obtain the 
necessary rigidity. The strap shall be out of contact with soil. The strap shall be 
securely attached to the column and footing by dowels so that the system acts as a 
unit. The footings shall be proportioned so that the least lateral dimensions are 
within 300 to 600 mm of each other and the soil pressures are approximately 
equal. 
 


--- Page 65 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/8 
 
8.6.4  
Overturning calculations. In analyzing overturning of the footing, the 
combination of unfactored loading that produces the greatest ratio of overturning 
moment to the corresponding vertical load shall be used. Where the eccentricity is 
inside the footing edge, the factor of safety against overturning shall be taken as 
the ratio of resisting moment to the maximum overturning moment. The maximum 
overturning moment and the resisting moment caused by the minimum dead 
weight of the structure; both shall be calculated about the pressed edge of the 
footing. The factor of safety shall not be less than 1.5.  
If overturning is considered to occur by yielding of the subsoil inside and along the 
pressed edge of the footing, the factor of safety against overturning shall be 
calculated from  
 
0
min
)
(
M
v
c
R
FS
v
−
=
                                                         (Equation 8-8) 
 
where: 
FS         =  Factor of safety. 
c            =  Distance from resultant of vertical forces to overturning edge. 
ν            =  Distance from the pressed edge to 
min
ν
R
.  
0
M         =  Overturning moment. 
min
ν
R
     =  Least resultant of all forces acting perpendicular to base area under any 
condition of loading simultaneous with the overturning moment. 
 
Both cases of rectangular and triangular distribution of the soil pressure along the 
pressed edge of the footing shall be considered and the value for FS shall not be 
less than 1.5. 
 
SECTION 8.7 
CONTINUOUS FOOTINGS 
 
8.7.0  
Continuous foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with 
Sections 8.7.1 through 8.7.3.  
 
8.7.1  
Design for rigid structures. Continuous strip footings supporting structures 
which, because of their stiffness, will not allow the individual columns to settle 
differentially may be designed using the rigid body assumption with a linear 
distribution of soil pressure determined based on statics.  
8.7.1.1  
Rigidity check based on relative stiffness. If the analysis of the relative stiffness 
of the footing yields a value greater than 0.5 the footing can be considered rigid 
and the variation of soil pressure shall be determined on the basis of simple statics. 
If the relative stiffness factor is found to be equal or less than 0.5, the footing shall 
be designed as a flexible member using the foundation modulus approach as 
described under Section 8.7.2. The relative stiffness shall be determined as  
 
3
B
E
EI
k
s
B
r =
                                                           
(Equation 8-9) 
where  
r
k  =   Relative stiffness. 
E  =   Modulus of elasticity of the material used in the superstructure. 


--- Page 66 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/9 
 
Es  =   Modulus of elasticity of soil. 
B  =   Base width of foundation perpendicular to direction of interest. 
IB  =   Moment of inertia per one unit width of the superstructure. 
 
An approximate value for the flexural rigidity of structure and footing, EIB, for one 
unit width of the structure can be obtained by adding the flexural rigidity for 
footing, EfIf, flexural rigidity for each member in the superstructure, EIb, and 
flexural rigidity for shear walls, Eah3/12 as follows  
 
∑
∑
+
+
=
12
3
Eah
EI
I
E
EI
bi
f
f
B
                                     
(Equation 8-10) 
where 
h 
= Wall height. 
a 
= Wall thickness. 
Ef 
= Modulus of elasticity for footing. 
Ibi 
= Moment of inertia for any member making up the frame resistance 
perpendicular to B. 
If 
= Moment of inertia per one unit width of the foundation. 
 
8.7.1.2  
Rigidity check based on column spacing. If the average of two adjacent spans in 
a continuous strip having adjacent loads and column spacings that vary by not 
more than 20 percent of the greater value, and is less than 1.75/λ , the footing can 
be considered rigid and the variation of soil pressure shall be determined on the 
basis of simple statics. The characteristic coefficient λ  is given by 
 
4
4
I
E
b
k
c
s
=
λ
                                                      
(Equation 8-11) 
where: 
b 
= Width of continuous footing or a strip of mat between centers of 
adjacent bays. 
Ec 
= Modulus of elasticity of concrete. 
I 
= Moment of inertia of the strip of width b. 
ks 
= Modulus of subgrade reaction of soil. 
 
 
If the average length of two adjacent spans as limited above is greater than 1.75/λ , 
the beam-on-elastic foundation method noted in Section 8.7.2 shall be used. For 
general cases falling outside the limitations given above, the critical spacing at 
which the subgrade modulus theory becomes effective shall be determined 
individually. 
8.7.2  
Design for flexible footings. A flexible continuous footing (either isolated or 
taken from a mat) shall be analyzed as a beam-on-elastic foundation. Thickness 
shall be established on the basis of allowable wide beam or punching shear 
without use of shear reinforcement.  
The evaluation of moments and shears can be simplified from the procedure 
involved in the classical theory of a beam supported by subgrade reactions, if the 
footing meets the following basic requirements  
1. The minimum number of bays is three. 
2. The variation in adjacent column loads is not greater than 20 percent. 


--- Page 67 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/10 
 
3. The variation in adjacent spans is not greater than 20 percent. 
4. The average length of adjacent spans is between the limits 1.75/λ  and 3.50/λ . 
 
If these limitations are met, the contact pressures can be assumed to vary linearly, 
with the maximum value under the columns and a minimum value at the center of 
each bay.  
 
SECTION 8.8 
GRID FOUNDATIONS 
 
8.8.1 
Grid foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with provisions 
of Sections 8.7. Grid foundations shall be analyzed as independent strips using 
column loads proportioned in direct ratio to the stiffness of the strips acting in each 
direction.  
 
SECTION 8.9 
MAT FOUNDATIONS 
 
8.9.1  
General. Mats shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 
8.9.1 through 8.9.3. Mats may be designed and analyzed as either rigid bodies or 
as flexible plates supported by an elastic foundation (the soil). In the analysis and 
design of mats a number of factors shall be considered that include, but need not 
be limited to, the following: 
1. Reliability of proposed value for the modulus of subgrade reaction obtained in 
accordance with Section 8.4.1.3.2. 
2. Finite soil-strata thickness and variations in soil properties both horizontally 
and vertically. 
3. Mat shape. 
4. Variety of superstructure loads and assumptions in their development. 
5. Effect of superstructure stiffness on mat and vice versa.  
The design and construction of mats shall be under the direct supervision of a 
registered design professional having sufficient knowledge and experience in 
foundation slab engineering, who shall certify to the building official that the mats 
as constructed satisfy the design criteria.  
 
8.9.2  
Excavation heaves. The influence of heave on subgrade response shall be 
determined by a geotechnical engineer. Recovery of the heave remaining after 
placing the mat shall be treated as either a recompression or as an elastic problem. 
If the problem is analyzed as a recompression problem, the subsurface response 
related to recompression shall be obtained by a geotechnical engineer. The 
subsurface response may be in the form of a recompression index or deflections 
computed by the geotechnical engineer based on elastic and consolidation 
subsurface behavior.  
 
8.9.3  
Design. A mat may be designed using the Strength Design Method of SBC 304. 
Analyses and designs using computer programs shall be permitted provided design 
assumptions, user input, and computer-generated output are submitted. The mat 
plan shall be proportioned using unfactored loads and any overturning moments. 
The pressure diagram is considered linear and computed from Equation 8-2 and 


--- Page 68 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/11 
 
shall be less than allowable load bearing. Loads shall include the effect of any 
column moments and any overturning moment due to wind or other effects. Any 
moments applied to the mat from columns or overturning, etc., shall be included 
when computing the eccentricity.  
The contact pressure shall not exceed the allowable load bearing determined from 
Chapter 4. The allowable soil pressure may be furnished as one or more values 
depending on long-term loading or including transient loads such as wind. The soil 
pressure furnished by the geotechnical engineer shall be factored to a pseudo 
“ultimate” value by multiplying the allowable pressure by the ratio of the sum of 
factored design loads to the sum of the unfactored design loads. 
8.9.3.1  
Mat thickness The minimum mat thickness based on punching shear at critical 
columns shall be computed based on column load and shear perimeter. The depth 
of the mat shall be found without using shear reinforcement and determined on the 
basis of diagonal-tension shear as noted in SBC 304 Chapter 15. Investigation of a 
two-sided (corner column) or three-sided diagonal tension shear perimeter shall be 
made for columns adjacent to mat edge. An investigation for wide-beam or 
diagonal tension shall be made for perimeter load-bearing walls. 
8.9.3.2  
Rigid design. It shall be permitted to design mats as rigid body with linear 
distribution for contact pressure if the mat, superstructure, or both is rigid enough 
not to allow differential settlement for columns. The reinforcing steel for bending 
is designed by treating the mat as a rigid body and considering strips both ways, if 
the following criteria are met:  
1. Column spacing is less than 1.75/λ  or the mat is very thick. 
2. Relative stiffness 
r
k  as noted in Equation 8-9 is greater than 0.5. 
3. Variation in column loads and spacing is not over 20 percent  
These strips are analyzed as combined footings with multiple columns loaded with 
the soil pressure on the strip, and column reactions equal to the factored (or 
unfactored) loads obtained from the superstructure analysis. Consideration shall be 
given to the shear transfer between strips to satisfy a vertical load summation. 
8.9.3.3  
Flexible design. For mats not meeting the criteria of Section 8.9.3.2, it shall be 
designed as a flexible plate in accordance with Sections 8.9.3.3.1 and 8.9.3.3.2. 
8.9.3.3.1  
Uniform loads and spacings. If variation in adjacent column loads and in 
adjacent spans is not greater than 20 percent it shall be permitted to analyze mats 
as continuous footings that can be analyzed according to the provisions of Section 
8.7.2. The mat shall be divided into strips the width of each is equal to the distance 
between adjacent bays. Each strip shall be analyzed independently considering 
column loads in both directions. The contact pressure is equal to the average 
contact pressure evaluated for each strip in each direction. 
8.9.3.3.2  
Nonuniform loads and spacings. If columns have irregular spacings or loads, 
mats may be analyzed based on theory of modulus subgrade reaction, elastic, plate 
method, finite difference method, finite grid method, finite element method, or any 
other method approved by the building official. 
 
8.9.4  
Circular mats or plates. For tall structure, differential settlements shall be 
carefully controlled to avoid toppling when the line of action of gravity forces falls 
out of the base. The plate depth shall be designed for wide-beam or diagonal-
tension shear as appropriate.  


--- Page 69 ---
COMBINED FOOTINGS AND MATS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
8/12 
 
 
8.9.5  
Ring foundations. For ring foundations used for water-tower structures, 
transmission 
towers, 
television 
antennas, 
and 
various 
other 
possible 
superstructures, analysis and designed shall be carried out using advanced method 
of analysis and carried out by a registered design profession knowledgeable in 
geotechnical and structural engineering. 
 
 
SECTION 8.10 
SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS 
 
8.10.1 
For combined footings and mats of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category 
C or D, provisions of SBC 301 and SBC 304 shall apply when not in conflict with 
the provisions of Chapter 5.  Strips between adjacent columns shall be capable of 
carrying, in tension or compression, a force equal to the product of the larger 
column load times the seismic coefficient SDS divided by 10 unless it is 
demonstrated that equivalent restraint is provided by the strips. 
  
  


--- Page 70 ---
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOIL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
9/1 
 
CHAPTER 9 
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOILS 
 
SECTION 9.1 
GENERAL 
 
9.1.0 
Scope. Provisions of this chapter shall apply to building foundation systems in 
expansive soil areas. Foundation design and construction shall be based on a site 
investigation as defined in Chapter 2, unless the building official ascertains that 
sufficient data upon which to base the design and construction of the foundation 
system is available. 
 
9.1.1  
Approval of special systems of design or construction. Sponsors of any system 
of design or construction within the scope of Chapter 9, the adequacy of which has 
been shown by successful use or by analysis or test, but which does not conform to 
or is not covered by Chapter 9, shall have the right to present that data on which 
their design is based to the building official or to a board of examiners appointed 
by the building official. This board shall be composed of competent geotechnical 
and structural engineers and shall have authority to investigate the data so 
submitted, to require tests, and to formulate rules governing design and 
construction of such systems to meet the intent of Chapter 9. These rules when 
approved by the building official and promulgated shall be of the same force as the 
provisions of Chapter 9.  
 
SECTION 9.2 
LOADINGS 
 
9.2.1 
Footings shall be designed for the most unfavorable effects due to the 
combinations of loads specified in Section 2.4 SBC 301. The dead load shall 
include the weight of foundations, footings and overlying fill. Reduced live loads, 
as specified in SBC 301 Section 4.8, are permitted to be used in designing 
footings. Strength design of reinforced concrete systems and elements shall 
comply with load combinations specified in SBC 304. 
 
SECTION 9.3 
DESIGN 
 
9.3.0 
SCOPE. Design for expansive soils shall be in accordance with the provisions of 
Sections 9.3.1 through 9.3.5. Provisions of Chapters 5 and 8 not specifically 
excluded and not in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 9 shall apply, where 
applicable. 
 
9.3.1  
General requirements. Footings or foundations placed on or within the active 
zone of expansive soils shall be designed to resist differential volume changes and 
to prevent structural damage to the supported structure. Deflection and racking of 
the supported structure shall be limited to that which will not interfere with the 
usability and serviceability of the structure. Foundations placed below where 
volume change occurs or below expansive soil shall comply with the following 
provisions: 
1. Foundations extending into or penetrating expansive soils shall be designed to 
prevent uplift of the supported structure.  


--- Page 71 ---
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOIL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
9/2 
 
2. Foundations penetrating expansive soils shall be designed to resist forces 
exerted on the foundation due to soil volume changes or shall be isolated from 
the expansive soil.  
Soil investigation report shall indicate the value or range of heave that might take 
place for the subject structure. Potential soil movement shall be determined based 
on the estimated depth of the active zone in combination with either of the 
following: 
1.  ASTM-D 4546.  
2. Any other method which can be documented and defended as a good 
engineering practice in accordance with the principles of unsaturated soil 
mechanics carried out by a Geotechnical Engineer and approved by the 
building official. 
 
9.3.2  
Foundations. Footings or foundations for buildings and structures founded on 
expansive soil areas shall be designed in accordance with Sections 9.3.2.1, 9.3.2.2, 
or 9.3.2.3. Alternate foundation designs shall be permitted subject to the 
provisions of Section 9.1.1. Footing or foundation design need not comply with 
Section 9.3.2.1, 9.3.2.2, or 9.3.2.3 where the soil is removed in accordance with 
Section 9.3.3, nor where the building official approves stabilization of the soil in 
accordance with Section 9.3.4, nor where the superstructure is design by a 
registered design professional to accommodate the potential heave. 
9.3.2.1  
Shallow foundations. Continuous or spread footings shall not be used on 
expansive soils unless the soil deposit has a low expansion potential, as 
determined in accordance with Table 9.1 or the superstructure is designed to 
account for the potential foundation movement. The uplift pressures on the sides 
of the footing shall be minimized to the extent possible.  
For continuous footings, the swell pressure shall be counteracted without 
exceeding the bearing capacity of the soil deposit by narrowing the width of the 
strip footing and/or providing void spaces within the supporting beam or wall. The 
continuous foundation shall be stiffened by increasing the reinforcement around 
the perimeter and into the floor slab.  
For spread footings, a void space shall be provided beneath the grade beams using 
the same technique as described for pier and grade beam construction in Section 
9.3.2.3. The footings shall be designed using as high bearing pressure, as 
practicable. 
TABLE 9.1 
CLASSIFICATION OF EXPANSION POTENTIAL 
Expansion Index (EI)a 
Expansion Potential 
0 – 20 
Very low 
21– 50 
Low 
51 – 90 
Medium 
91 –130 
High 
>  130 
Very high 
a. EI =  {1000× (final height of specimen – initial height of specimen)/initial height of specimen}, 
as per ASTM D 4829. 


--- Page 72 ---
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOIL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
9/3 
 
 
9.3.2.2  
Slab-on-grade foundations. Slab-on-grade (Slab-on-ground) foundations on 
expansive soils shall be designed and constructed in accordance with WRI/CRSI 
Design of Slab-on-Ground Foundations.  
A conventionally reinforced slab-on-grade foundation shall conform to applicable 
provisions of SBC 304, where applicable. All variables affecting finished-slab 
performance shall be considered when selecting a slab type and when specifying 
or executing a slab design. All slab-on-grade foundations, with the exception of 
conventionally reinforced slabs less than 50 m2, shall be designed by a registered 
design professional having sufficient knowledge and experience in structural and 
foundation engineering. Design of slab shall be conducted for conditions of both 
center and edge heave. Construction joints shall be placed at intervals not 
exceeding 4.5 m. 
Exception: Slab-on-grade systems that have performed adequately in soil 
conditions similar to those encountered at the building site are permitted subject to 
the approval of the building official. 
9.3.2.3  
Beam-on-drilled pier. The design provisions of Chapter 17 shall be expanded to 
include, but need not be limited to, the requirements of Sections 9.3.2.3.1 and 
9.3.2.3.2. 
9.3.2.3.1  
General requirements. 
1. A void space shall be maintained beneath the grade beam between the piers. 
The required void space shall be determined based on the predicted heave of 
the soil beneath the beam but shall not be less than 150 mm.  
2. Care shall be taken in the design to provide for sealing the space between the 
soil and the pier, such that deep seated heave that may result from water 
gaining access to soils below active zone along the shaft of the pier, is 
prevented.  
3. Sufficient field penetration resistance tests shall be performed not only to 
establish the proper friction value but also to ensure that soft soils are not the 
cause of tensile forces developed in the pier. 
4. The upper 1.5 m of soil around the pier shall be excluded when calculating the 
pier load capacity. 
5. Friction piers shall not be used at sites where groundwater table is either high 
or expected to become high in the future. 
6. Uplift skin friction shall be permitted to be assumed constant throughout the 
active zone. 
7. Where the upper soils are highly expansive or if there is a possibility of loss of 
skin friction along the lower anchorage portion of the shaft due to rise of 
groundwater table, the bottom of the shaft shall be belled or under-reamed. The 
vertical side shall be a minimum of 150 mm high and the sloping sides of the 
bell shall be formed at either 60 °  or 45 ° . For piers founded well below the 
active zone, the shaft may not be under-reamed. 
8. Upward movement of the top of the pier and the tensile forces developed in the 
pier shall be considered in the design of drilled piers.  


--- Page 73 ---
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOIL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
9/4 
 
9. Mushrooming of the pier near the top shall be avoided. Cylindrical cardboard 
at/or extended above the top of the concrete shall be used to prevent formation 
of mushroomed piers. 
9.3.2.3.2  
Reinforcement. Reinforcing steel shall extend the entire length of the pier and 
shall be hooked into the belled bottom, if used, and into the grade beam at the top. 
The area of the steel shall be designed to resist all tensile loads to which the pier 
may be subjected but shall not be less than a minimum of 1 percent of the cross-
sectional area of the pier.  
 
9.3.3  
Removal of expansive soil. Where expansive soil is removed in lieu of designing 
footings or foundations in accordance with Section 9.3.2.1, 9.3.2.2, or 9.3.2.3, the 
soil shall be removed to a depth sufficient to ensure constant moisture content in 
the remaining soil. Fill material shall not contain expansive soils and shall comply 
with Sections 3.6 and 3.10 or 3.11. If the expansive strata are not entirely 
removed, the fill material shall be impermeable enough not to provide access for 
water into expansive grades or foundation soils. 
Exception: Expansive soil need not be removed to the depth of constant moisture, 
provided the confining pressure in the expansive soil created by the fill and 
supported structure exceeds the swell pressure. 
 
9.3.4  
Stabilization. Where the active zone of expansive soils is stabilized in lieu of 
designing footings or foundations in accordance with Section 9.3.2.1, 9.3.2.2, or 
9.3.2.3, the soil shall be stabilized by chemical, installation of moisture barriers, 
pre-wetting or other techniques designed by a geotechnical engineer 
knowledgeable in unsaturated soil mechanics and approved by the building 
official. In pre-wetting technique, the effect of strength loss shall be evaluated to 
ensure that strength criteria are met. Limitations and implementation procedures of 
the contemplated stabilization technique shall receive careful consideration and 
thorough evaluation.  
 
9.3.5  
Required preventive measures. Applicable provisions of Chapter 13 shall be 
expanded to include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
1. All water-supply pipes and wastewater pipes shall be watertight and have 
flexible connections and couplings. 
2. All rainwater pipes shall be ducted well away from the foundations. It shall be 
made sure that all water from downspout is discharged away from the building 
into storm sewer or suitable ground surface location downhill. 
3. The ground surface shall slope away from the structure. Bare or paved areas 
shall have a slope not less than 2 %, and if possible the ground surface within 3 
meters of the structure shall be sloped at a 10 percent grade. 
4. Storage tanks and septic tanks shall be reinforced to minimize cracking and 
have adequate flexible water-proofing as per section 13.5. 
5. Plants and irrigation systems shall not be placed immediately adjacent to the 
structure and spray heads shall be directed away from the structure. Large trees 
and bushes shall be kept away from the foundations for a distance greater than 
half their mature height.  
6. If horizontal moisture barriers are installed around the building to move edge 
effects away from the foundation and minimize seasonal fluctuations of water 


--- Page 74 ---
DESIGN FOR EXPANSIVE SOIL
 
SBC 303 
2007 
9/5 
 
content directly below the structure, care shall be taken to seal joints, seams, 
rips, or holes in the barrier. Horizontal moisture barriers may take different 
forms including, but not necessarily limited to, membranes, rigid paving 
(concrete aprons, etc.), or flexible paving (asphalt membranes, etc.).  
7. If vertical moisture barriers are used around the perimeter of the building they 
shall be installed at least one meter from the foundation to a depth equal to or 
greater than the depth of seasonal moisture variation (active zone). Buried 
vertical barriers may consist of polyvinyl chloride, polyethylene, polymer-
modified asphalt or any other approved methods or materials.    
8. If the structure has a basement, the backfill shall consist of non-expansive soils 
and it shall comply with Sections 3.6 and 3.10 or 3.11.  
 
SECTION 9.4 
PRE-CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS 
 
9.4.1 
A pre-construction site inspection shall be performed to verify the following: 
1. Vegetation and associated root systems have been removed from the 
construction site. 
2. No beam trench cuttings or scarified material have been placed as fill material. 
3. All fill has been placed in accordance with Sections 3.6 and 3.10 or 3.11 in any 
portions or sections of the foundation supporting grade. 
4. Proper soil compaction of the foundation footprint and fill material has been 
performed to a minimum of 95 percent standard proctor density. 
 
SECTION 9.5 
INSPECTION PRIOR TO PLACEMENT OF CONCRETE 
 
9.5.1 
Prior to the placement of concrete, an inspection of the beam geometrics, 
penetrations, cable(s), cable(s) anchorage/steel placements and other details of the 
design shall be made to verify conformance with the design plans. 
 
SECTION 9.6 
CONCRETE 
 
9.6.1 
Material, construction, and placement of concrete shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 5.4.2 and Section 8.3.  
  


--- Page 75 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/1 
 
CHAPTER 10 
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
 
SECTION 10.1 
GENERAL 
 
10.1.0 
SCOPE. Provisions of this chapter shall apply to building foundation systems on 
collapsible soil areas. Foundation design and construction shall be based on a site 
investigation as defined in Chapter 2, unless the building official ascertains that 
sufficient data upon which to base the design and construction of the foundation 
system is available. 
 
10.1.1  
Approval of special systems of design or construction. Sponsors of any system 
of design or construction within the scope of Chapter 10, the adequacy of which 
has been shown by successful use or by analysis or test, but which does not 
conform to or is not covered by Chapter 10, shall have the right to present that data 
on which their design is based to the building official or to a board of examiners 
appointed by the building official. This board shall be composed of competent 
geotechnical and structural engineers and shall have authority to investigate the 
data so submitted, to require tests, and to formulate rules governing design and 
construction of such systems to meet the intent of Chapter 10. These rules when 
approved by the building official and promulgated shall be of the same force as the 
provisions of Chapter 10.  
 
SECTION 10.2 
LOADINGS 
 
10.2.1 
Footings shall be designed for the most unfavorable effects due to the 
combinations of loads specified in Section 2.4 SBC 301. The dead load shall 
include the weight of foundations, footings and overlying fill. Reduced live loads, 
as specified in SBC 301 Section 4.8, are permitted to be used in designing 
footings. Strength design of reinforced concrete systems and elements shall 
comply with load combinations specified in SBC 304. 
 
SECTION 10.3 
DESIGN 
 
10.3.0 
Design for collapsible soils shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections 
10.3.1 through 10.3.3. Provisions of Chapters 5 and 8 not specifically excluded 
and not in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 10 shall apply, where applicable. 
 
10.3.1  
Foundations. Footings or foundations for buildings and structures founded on 
collapsible soil areas shall be designed in accordance with Sections 10.3.1.1 
through 10.3.1.4 Alternate foundation designs shall be permitted subject to the 
provisions of Section 10.1.1. Footing or foundation design need not comply with 
Sections 10.3.1.1 and 10.3.1.2 where the soil is removed in accordance with 
Section 10.3.2, nor where the building official approves stabilization of the soil in 
accordance with Section 10.3.3, nor where the superstructure is designed by a 
registered design professional to accommodate the potential settlements. 


--- Page 76 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/2 
 
10.3.1.1  
Classification of collapse potential. Collapse potential shall be permitted to be 
classified in accordance with one of the methods prescribed in Sections 10.3.1.1.1, 
10.3.1.1.2, or 10.3.1.1.3. 
10.3.1.1.1  Collapse index method. The collapsibility of a particular soil under specified 
conditions could be determined in accordance with ASTM D5333. The specimen 
collapse shall be classified according to the collapse index, Ie, as set forth in Table 
10.1. 
10.3.1.1.2  Standard plate load test method. Where undisturbed soil specimens are 
irretrievable, collapse potential for specific field conditions could be estimated 
from standard plate load tests (SPLT), conducted in test pit under unsoaked and 
soaked conditions in accordance with ASTM D1194.  
10.3.1.1.3  BREA infiltration and plate load test method. Collapse potential could be 
determined in accordance with BREA Building Regulations in Eastern Arriyadh 
Sensitive Soils procedures (BPLT). The procedures shall apply to tests performed 
in test pits or trenches. The infiltration field test shall be performed in accordance 
with the procedure set forth in Table 10.2 and the field plate load test shall be 
carried following the procedure outlined in Table 10.3. The stability of the reaction 
column and side-wall of the test pit shall be considered, particularly for test pits 
deeper than 4 meters. 
10.3.1.1.3.1 Design curve construction. A design curve for the site shall be constructed in 
accordance with the steps outlined in Table 10.4. A data sheet in the form shown 
in Table 10.4 may be used for the raw data gathered during the test and for the 
reduced data.  
10.3.1.2  
Design procedure. Based on which method used in estimating the collapse 
potential of the soil deposit as provided in Sections 10.3.1.1.1, 10.3.1.1.2, or 
10.3.1.1.3, design for collapsible soils shall be in accordance with Sections 
10.3.1.2.1, 10.3.1.2.2, or 10.3.1.2.3, respectively.  
10.3.1.2.1  Design based on collapse index. Potential settlement that may occur in a soil 
layer under the applied vertical stress is obtained as follows   
 
cI
H
100
=
ρ
                                                       
(Equation 10-1)  
 
where: 
H  =   Thickness of the soil layer. 
Ic  =  Collapse potential, determined using a predetermined applied vertical stress 
applied to a soil specimen taken from the soil layer as follows. 
 
o
i
f
c
h
d
d
I
−
=
×  100                                                 
(Equation 10-2)  
 
where: 
di =  Specimen height at the appropriate stress level before wetting. 
df =  Specimen height at the appropriate stress level after wetting. 
ho =  Initial specimen height. 
 


--- Page 77 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/3 
 
 
Based on settlement value determined by Equation 10-1, the foundation system 
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 5 and 8, where 
applicable.  
 
Limitations. Amount of settlement depends on the extent of wetting front and 
availability of water, which can rarely be predicted prior to collapse. Prediction of 
settlement based on collapse potential shall be viewed and interpreted accordingly. 
 
TABLE 10.1 
CLASSIFICATION OF COLLAPSE POTENTIAL 
 
Collapse index (Ie )a percent 
Degree of Specimen Collapse 
0 
None 
0.1-2.0 
Slight 
2.1-6.0 
Moderate 
6.1-10.0 
Moderately severe 
> 10 
Severe 
a
100
1
o
e
e
e
I
+
∆
=
, where 
e
∆ = change in void ratio resulting from wetting, and eo = initial void ratio. 
TABLE 10.2 
BREA INFILTRATION FIELD TEST PROCEDURE 
 
1. Excavate a trench or test pit to the desired depth of testing and provide a smooth flat surface for 
testing. Do not backfill to achieve smoothness. 
2. At a distance no less than 3 plate diameters (3D) from the trench or test pit excavated in step 1, 
excavate a shallow infiltration pit to a depth of 60 to 100 mm and a diameter of 2D. This pit for 
the preliminary rate-of-infiltration test shall be separated by 3D from the supports of the 
reference beam. Measure the depth of the dry infiltration pit at the center.  
3. Fill the infiltration pit with water and note the time at which wetting was commenced. Add water 
during infiltration as needed to keep the bottom of the pit covered. 
4. After an infiltration time, tp, of about 10 to 20 minutes, remove the excess water from the test pit, 
quickly excavate at the center of the pit to locate the depth of wetting, and measure down to the 
wetting front. The depth of wetting from the preliminary infiltration test (Zwp) is equal to depth 
of wetting front minus the original depth of the dry pit. 
5. The infiltration coefficient for the preliminary test (Cip) is computed as 
Cip= Zwp/(tp)1/2    
Where: Zwp =   depth of infiltration for the preliminary infiltration 
test, mm. 
             Cip  =   infiltration coefficient for the preliminary infiltration 
test,    mm/min1/2. 
             tp  = time duration of infiltration for the preliminary 
infiltration test, min. 
 
 
 
TABLE 10.3 
BREA PLATE LOAD TEST PROCEDURE (BPLT) 
 
1. 
For the BPLT, choose the target depth of infiltration (Ztar), equal 0.5D. 
2. 
Compute target time of infiltration (ttar) from:   ttar = (Ztar/Cip)2 
3. 
Place the loading plate on a smooth flat surface and twist and tap lightly. The bottom of the loading plate may     
be coated with 5-10 mm of quick setting epoxy before placing it on the soil. 
4. 
Construct a berm to hold water in preparation for ponding. The outside diameter of the ponded water shall be 
about 2D. 
5. 
Install the reference beam to rest on firm supports located at least 3D from center of loading plate. 
6. 
Attach displacement gauges so that they touch the loading plate on opposite sides and approximately equidistant 
from the center of the plate. 
7. 
Install the loading jack and reaction column. 
8. 
Apply a seating load of 3 to 8 kPa and zero the displacement gauges. It may be convenient to use the weight of 
the loading jack and plate as the seating load. 
9. 
Increase load to 15 kPa. Wait one minute and take displacement readings. 
10. Commence wetting and note starting time. Maintain water level 10 to 20 mm above the top of the plate. 
11. Continue wetting until ttar (computed from step 2) has elapsed. Read displacement gauges, note time and 
increase load to 40 kPa. 
12. Wait ∆t minutes, read displacement gauges, note time, increase load to 100 kPa. The time increment ∆t may 


--- Page 78 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/4 
 
be chosen as the larger of 2 minutes or 0.1ttar. For convenience, ∆t may be rounded to the nearest minute. 
13. Wait ∆t minutes, read displacement gauges, note time, increase load to 200 kPa. 
14. Wait ∆t minutes, read displacement gauges, note time, increase load to 400 kPa. 
15. Wait ∆t minutes, read displacement gauges, note time, remove load from the plate, remove the plate and 
quickly excavate to determine the final depth (Zwfinal) and note the corresponding time tfinal. 
 
 
TABLE 10.4 
DATA REDUCTION FOR DESIGN CURVE CONSTRUCTION 
 
1. 
In column-1, description of the test stage. This will give meaning to column-2 (time column). 
2. 
In column-2, time shall be recorded. 
3. 
In column-3, elapsed time (tw) shall be computed. Elapsed time is set equal to zero when ponding is commenced. 
4. 
In column-4, pressure reading on the jack shall be recorded. A load cell could be substituted for the pressure gauge on the jack. 
5. 
In column-5, the added load on the plate shall be recorded. 
6. 
In column-6, the total load on the plate shall be recorded. This is obtained by adding column-5 to the weight (in kN) of the jack and the 
loading plate. 
7. 
In column-7, the left and right displacement gauges readings shall be recorded. 
8. 
In column-8, the displacement, ∆H, for the left and right gauges shall be recorded. They are obtained by subtracting the initial gauge 
readings at seating load from each subsequent reading. 
9. 
In column-9, the average displacement ( ∆Have) is obtained by averaging the ∆H values from the left and right reading in column-8.  
10. 
In column-10, the depth of wetting (Zw) shall be computed by first determining Citest from: Citest = (Zwfinal)/(tfinal)1/2 and then use it with tw 
to get Zw  from: Zw = (Citest)(tw) ½ . 
 
11. 
In column-11, Zw/D shall be computed (column-10 divided by plate diameter). 
12. 
In column-12, the influence factors IF  and IS obtained from the below figure at Zw/D shall be recorded. 
13. 
In column-13, the contact pressure (qcon) shall be calculated by dividing column-6 by the plate area. 
14. 
In column-14, the average stress within the wetted zone (qave) shall be calculated by multiplying column-13 (qcon) by column-12 (IF  for 
first loading or IS  for subsequent loadings).  
15. 
In column-15, the average strain ( ε ave) shall be computed by dividing column-9 ( ∆Have) by column-10 (Zw) and multiplying the result 
by 100. 
16. 
Plot qave versus ε ave for different tests on the same diagram. Obtain the average of all tests and sketch a DESIGN CURVE. 
AVERAGE INFLUENCE FACTORS FOR THE 
WETTED ZONE: 
IF :  FOR THE FIRST LOADING 
IS : FOR SUBSEQUENT LOADINGS 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.33
0.66
0.99
1.32
1.65
1.98
Zw/D
I
IS
IF
 
         
            Data sheet and computations 
Date: 
Job No.: 
Test Location: 
Test Pit No.: 
Depth of Test Pit: 
Ground Surface Elevation: 
Zwp: 
tp: 
 Cip: 
 Ztar: 
 ttar: 
∆t: 
(1) 
 
Stage 
(2) 
 
Time 
(3) 
 
Elapsed 
time,  
tw 
 
(4) 
 
Pressure 
reading on 
Jack 
(5) 
 
Added load 
 
(6) 
Total 
load 
on 
plate 
(7) 
 
Dial gauge 
reading 
(mm) 
(8) 
 
Displacement 
(mm) 
(9) 
 
∆Have 
 
 
(10) 
 
Zw 
 
 
(11) 
 
Zw/D 
 
 
(12) 
 
IF 
or 
IS 
(13) 
 
qcon 
 
 
(14) 
 
qave 
 
 
(15) 
 
ε ave 
 
 
 
(min.) 
(min.) 
 
(kN) 
(kN) 
Left 
Right 
Left 
Right 
(mm) 
(mm) 
 
 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
(percent) 
Seating load 
applied 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dry loading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wetting 
commenced 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.3.1.2.2  Design based on SPLT. From the load-deformation curve obtained from standard 
plate load test under soaked condition in accordance with Section 10.3.1.1.2, the 


--- Page 79 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/5 
 
allowable load bearing is taken equal to the value corresponding to settlement of 
test plate determined from Equation 10-3 as follows  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D
p
P
B
B
δ
δ
2
0
1
4
1
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
+
=
                                               (Equation 10-3) 
 
 
where: 
p
δ
     =  Settlement of test plate. 
D
δ    =  Design settlement of prototype foundation taken to be equal to half the 
allowable settlement value given from Section 5.4.1.5. 
Bo      =  Width of prototype footing. 
Bp      =  Width of test plate. 
 
 
Based on the obtained allowable load bearing, the foundation system shall be 
designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 5 and 8, where applicable.  
 
Limitations. In determining the bearing pressure for the specified tolerable 
differential settlement, the validity and accuracy of any resulting computations 
shall be approved by the building official and evaluated on the basis of the 
following variables: 
1. Dependence of the amount of settlement on the extent of the wetting front and 
availability of water, which can rarely be predicted prior to collapse. 
2. The influence depth set to be four times the footing width is significantly 
different for the model versus prototype footing.  
3. Increase soil stiffness due to increased confinement with depth.  
10.3.1.2.3  Design based on BPLT. Design of spread and strip footings shall conform to the 
provisions of Section 10.3.1.2.3.1 and mats shall be designed in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 10.3.1.2.3.2. 
10.3.1.2.3.1 Spread and continuous footings. Spread and continuous footings are permitted to 
be used without modifications in areas with low collapse potential, as determined 
in accordance with Table 10.5. In areas with higher collapse potential, strip 
footings are permitted, provided that the requirements for additional distortion 
resistance specified in Table 10.8 are met. 
10.3.1.2.3.2 Stiffened mat foundations. The design procedure for mat foundations in 
collapsible soils is summarized in Table 10.9. The mat shall be designed and 
constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8, where applicable, and 
the requirements for additional distortion resistance specified in Table 10.8 shall 
be met. 
 
10.3.2  
Removal of collapsible soil. Where collapsible soil is removed in lieu of 
designing footings or foundations in accordance with Section 10.3.1, the soil shall 
be removed to a sufficient depth to ensure constant moisture content in the 
remaining soil. Fill material shall not contain collapsible soils and shall comply 
with the provisions of Sections 3.6 and 3.10 or 3.11. 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 80 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/6 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 10.5 
DESIGN OF SPREAD AND STRIP FOOTINGS ON COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
 
1. 
From Table 10.6, use strain under the plate corresponding to stress of 100 kPa ( 100
ε
) to classify the site 
with respect to collapse potential. 
2. 
Pre-wetting is required for very high collapse potential, and permitted but not required for high collapse 
potential. 
3. 
When pre-wetting is chosen or required, the DESIGN CURVE constructed in Table 10.4 is replaced with 
a recompression design curve whose strain values are everywhere 15percent of those on the original 
design curve, and the site is reclassified accordingly. 
4. 
Use Tables 10.6 and 10.7 to obtain required design parameters Df (foundation depth), Dwdes (depth of 
wetted bulb), foundation type, required distortion resistance, 
diff
H
∆
/L and 
diff
H
∆
/
tot
H
∆
. 
5. 
From Table 10.7 use column spacing, L, to compute 
diff
H
∆
, then compute 
tot
H
∆
 from the same table. 
6. 
Compute Zw = Dwdes – Df. 
7. 
Compute maximum allowable 
ave
ε
= 
tot
H
∆
/ Zw. 
8. 
Compute the overburden pressure (Podes) at Dwdes. 
9. 
From the DESIGN CURVE get allowable 
ave
ε
 corresponding to Podes. 
10. If 
ave
ε
 ≥ allowable 
ave
ε
from step-7, change Df, foundation type or stiffness level and recalculate. 
11. If 
ave
ε
<  allowable 
ave
ε
, use allowable 
ave
ε
in the DESIGN CURVE to get allowable Ptot, then find qave 
as follows:  qave  =  allowable Ptot - Podes  
 
 
 
 
12. Assume a first trial value of B (footing width). Compute Zw/B, find Iave from the Figure below and 
compute qall as follows:     qall = allowable qave/Iave  
  
13. Use the trial value of B, footing shape and column load to compute qcon. If qcon ≈qall, then B value is 
accepted, otherwise change B and iterate until convergence, then proceed with structural design. 
14. In case of no convergence or if B or qall are not acceptable, increase Df, change footing type, change 
distortion stiffness or a combination of those. 
INFLUENCE FACTOR 
FOR AVERAGE 
STRESS WITHIN 
WETTED ZONE VS. 
DEPTH OF WETTED 
ZONE 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Z w / B  o r Z w / D
I a v e
square or circular footing
st rip footing
 
 
 
 
10.3.3 Stabilization. Where collapsible soils are stabilized in lieu of designing footings or 
foundations in accordance with Section 10.3.1, the soil shall be stabilized by 
compaction, pre-wetting, vibroflotation, chemical, or other techniques designed by a 
geotechnical engineer knowledgeable in unsaturated soil mechanics and approved by 
the building official. The provisions of Section 9.3.5 shall also be considered, where 
applicable. In pre-wetting technique, the effect of strength loss shall be evaluated to 
ensure that strength criteria are met. Great care must be exercised when using pre-
wetting near existing structures that underlain by collapsible soils, particularly if the 
soil has strong stratification, as in the case of many alluvial soils, and injected water 
may flow horizontally more than it does vertically. Limitations and implementation 
procedures of the contemplated stabilization technique shall receive careful 
consideration and thorough evaluation.  
 


--- Page 81 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/7 
 
TABLE 10.6 
MINIMUM DESIGN PARAMETERS AS A FUNCTION OF COLLAPSE POTENTIAL 
 
100
ε
 
(percent) 
Collapse 
potential 
Minimum Df 
(m) 
Minimum design 
depth of wetting 
Dwdes (m) 
Required 
distortion 
stiffness 
Allowable types of 
foundation 
0 - 0.5 
Low 
1.0 
3.5 
Level 0 
Spread, Strip, Mat 
0.5 - 1.5 
Moderate 
1.5 
3.5 
Level I 
Strip, Mat 
1.5 - 5.0 
High 
2.0 
3.5 
Level II 
Strip, Mat 
>5.0 
Very high 
2.5 
3.5 
Level II 
Strip, Mat 
 
TABLE 10.7 
REQUIRED MINIMUM RATIOS OF DIFFERENTIAL TO TOTAL SETTLEMENT 
AS A FUNCTION OF FOUNDATION TYPE AND DISTORTION STIFFNESS 
 
Type of 
foundation 
Min. Design 
L
Hdiff
∆
 
diff
H
∆
/
tot
H
∆
 as a function of Required Extra 
Distortion Resistance 
Level 0 
Level I 
Level II 
Spread 
1/500 
0.85 
0.75 
0.65 
Strip 
1/500 
0.65 
0.55 
0.45 
Mat 
1/500 
0.35 
0.30 
0.25 
 
TABLE 10.8 
REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA DISTORTION RESISTANCE 
 
Distortion 
Stiffness 
Type of 
Foundation 
Extra 
Concrete in 
Grade Beam 
Extra 
Concrete in 
Footing 
Extra Steel 
in Footing 
Extra Steel 
in Wall and 
Floor 
Extra Steel in 
Foundation 
Column 
Level 0 
Refers to standard design and requires no extra distortion resistance 
Level I 
Spread 
Footing 
10percent 
higher 
10percent 
thicker 
2 bars 
− 
3 bars 
Strip 
Footing 
10percent 
higher 
10percent 
thicker 
2 bars 
− 
3 bars 
Mat 
− 
− 
− 
15percent, see 
Figure 10.1 
− 
Level II 
Spread 
Footing 
20percent 
higher 
20percent 
thicker 
3 bars 
− 
6 bars 
Strip 
Footing 
20percent 
higher 
20percent 
thicker 
3 bars 
− 
6 bars 
Mat 
− 
− 
− 
25percent, see 
Figure 10.1 
− 
  
 
SECTION 10.4 
INSPECTIONS 
10.4.1 
A pre-construction site inspection shall be conducted to verify that the provisions 
of Section 9.4 have been met.  
 
SECTION 10.5 
CONCRETE 
 
10.5.1 
Material, construction, and placement of concrete shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 5.4.2 and Section 8.3. Prior to the placement of concrete, an 
inspection of the beam geometrics, reinforcements and other details of the design 
shall be made to verify conformance with the design plans. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 82 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 10.1 
EXTRA STEEL IN WALL AND FLOOR FOR MAT FOUNDATION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wall
 
100 D
 
Floor
 
100 D
 
D = bar diameter
 


--- Page 83 ---
DESIGN FOR COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
SBC 303 
2007 
10/9 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 10.9 
DESIGN OF MAT FOUNDATION ON COLLAPSIBLE SOILS 
 
1. From Table 10.6, use strain under the plate corresponding to stress of 100 kPa ( 100
ε
) to classify the site 
with respect to collapse potential. 
2. Pre-wetting is required for very high collapse potential, and permitted but not required for high collapse 
potential. 
3. When pre-wetting is chosen or required, the DESIGN CURVE is replaced with a recompression design 
curve whose strain values are everywhere 15percent of those on the original design curve, and the site is 
reclassified accordingly. 
4. Use Tables 10.6 and 10.7 to obtain required design parameters Df (foundation depth), Dwdes (depth of wetted 
bulb), foundation type, required distortion resistance, 
diff
H
∆
/L and 
diff
H
∆
/
tot
H
∆
. 
5. Compute 
tot
H
∆
. 
6. Compute Zw = Dwdes – Df. 
7. Compute maximum allowable 
ave
ε
 = 
tot
H
∆
 / Zw. 
8. Compute the overburden pressure (Podes) at 1/3 of the way from the base of the foundation to Dwdes. For mat 
foundations, only a fraction of the Podes acts on the soil during wetting as seen from Table below. 
9. The average contact stress under a mat, qcon, is governed by the weight of the structure including the mat and 
the footprint of the structure. Only Df and distortion stiffness can be changed in pursuit of an acceptable 
design.  
10. Compute qcon, Zw/B and estimate Iave from Table 10.5, using the curve for square footing or interpolate 
between the curves as a function of the shape of structure in plan (length/width ≥ 4 can be interpreted as 
strip). 
11. Compute  
qave = Iave ×  qcon 
12. Compute 
 Podes = a × Po, where the factor 'a' represent percentage of overburden stress acting on the 
wetted soil under mats and is obtained as 
Zw/B 
factor a 
0 - 0.1 
0.1 
0.1 - 0.3 
0.3 
0.3 - 0.6 
0.5 
 
13. Compute Ptot = qave + Podes 
14. Enter the DESIGN CURVE to get 
ave
ε
 and compute 
tot
H
∆
 =  
ave
ε
 ×  Zw 
15. If 
tot
H
∆
 < allowable 
tot
H
∆
 from above, the design is acceptable. Proceed with structural design. 
16. If 
tot
H
∆
 >  allowable 
tot
H
∆
 from above, increase Df and/or increase distortion stiffness and recalculate 
tot
H
∆
. 
 
Note: Podes= aPo= That portion of the overburden stress assumed to produce strain upon wetting. 
  


--- Page 84 ---
DESIGN FOR SABKHA SOILS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
11/1 
 
CHAPTER 11 
DESIGN FOR SABKHA SOILS 
 
SECTION 11.1 
GENERAL 
 
11.1.0 
SCOPE. Provisions of this chapter shall apply to building foundation systems in 
sabkha soil areas. Foundation design and construction shall be based on a site 
investigation as defined in Chapter 2, unless the building official ascertains that 
sufficient data upon which to base the design and construction of the foundation 
system is available. 
 
11.1.1  
Approval of special systems of design or construction. Sponsors of any system 
of design or construction within the scope of Chapter 11, the adequacy of which 
has been shown by successful use or by analysis or test, but which does not 
conform to or is not covered by Chapter 11, shall have the right to present that data 
on which their design is based to the building official or to a board of examiners 
appointed by the building official. This board shall be composed of competent 
geotechnical and structural engineers and shall have authority to investigate the 
data so submitted, to require tests, and to formulate rules governing design and 
construction of such systems to meet the intent of Chapter 11. These rules when 
approved by the building official and promulgated shall be of the same force as the 
provisions of Chapter 11.  
 
SECTION 11.2 
LOADINGS 
 
11.2.1 
Footings shall be designed for the most unfavorable effects due to the 
combinations of loads specified in SBC 301 Section 2.4. The dead load shall 
include the weight of foundations, footings and overlying fill. Reduced live loads, 
as specified in SBC 301 Section 4.8, are permitted to be used in designing 
footings. Strength design of reinforced concrete systems and elements shall 
comply with load combinations specified in SBC 304. 
 
SECTION 11.3 
DESIGN 
 
11.3.0 
Design for sabkha soils shall conform to the provisions of Sections 11.3.1 through 
11.3.2. Provisions of Chapters 5 and 8 not specifically excluded and not in conflict 
with the provisions of Chapter 11 shall apply, where applicable. 
 
11.3.1  
General requirements. Footings or foundations placed on or within sabkha soils 
shall be designed to prevent structural damage to the supported structure due to 
detrimental settlement. Deflection and racking of the supported structure shall be 
limited to that which will not interfere with the usability and serviceability of the 
structure. Design shall consider, but need not limited to, the following: 
1. The decrease in strength of the surface crust of the sabkha as a result of 
moisture content increase. This crust shall not be used as a foundation layer. 
2. The variation of compressibility characteristics of the site resulting from 
differences in layer thickness, degree of cementation, and relative density of 
different locations within the site.  


--- Page 85 ---
DESIGN FOR SABKHA SOILS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
11/2 
 
3. Differential settlements and foundation instabilities due to volume changes that 
accompany hydration and dehydration of gypsum rich layers under the hot and 
humid conditions.  
4. High concentrations of chlorides and sulphates in the sabkha sediments and 
brines, and the subsequent highly corrosive to both concrete and steel. 
Soil investigation report shall indicate the value or range of settlement that might 
take place for the subject structure. Potential settlements shall be estimated by a 
method of analysis that can be documented and defended as a good engineering 
practice and approved by the building official. Allowable settlements shall 
conform to the requirements of Sections 5.4.1.5 and 8.5, where applicable. 
 
11.3.2  
Foundations. For heavy structures, mat or deep foundations shall be considered, 
and provisions of Chapter 8 and Chapters 14 through 17 shall govern, where 
applicable.  
For lightly loaded buildings and structures founded on sabkha soil areas, and 
provided that water table is always kept beneath the foundation level, it shall be 
permitted to design and construct footings or foundations in accordance with 
Sections 11.3.2.1 through 11.3.2.3, subject to the approval of building official, and 
under a direct supervision of a geotechnical engineer knowledgeable in sabkha 
soils.  
Alternate foundation designs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of 
Section 11.1.1. Footing or foundation design need not comply with Section 
11.3.1and 11.3.2 where the soil is removed in accordance with Section 11.6, nor 
where the building official approves stabilization of the soil in accordance with 
Section 11.7, nor where the superstructure is design by a registered design 
professional to accommodate the potential settlements. 
11.3.2.1  
Water table below 5 meters depth 
Where groundwater is 5 meters below the ground surface level, external and 
internal walls have to be supported by a concrete strip foundation. Water 
infiltration shall be prevented under the floor slabs by installing heavy duty 
polythene sheeting, or other approved materials, as shown in Figure 11.1(a). Joints 
in the polythene sheeting shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Strip foundation shall be supported by 
lean mix concrete to prevent contamination of the wet concrete when poured.  
11.3.2.2  
Water table between 2.5 and 5 meters depth 
Where groundwater is between 2.5 meters and 5 meters below the ground surface 
level, provisions of Section 11.3.2.1 shall be satisfied. Slab floors have to be 
supported by a strip foundation as illustrated in Figure 11.1(b). Coarse, durable 
gravels shall be placed beneath the floor slab and around the strip foundation. 
11.3.2.3  
Water table between ground level and 2.5 meters depth  
Where groundwater is between ground level and 2.5 meters, the provisions of 
Section 11.3.2.2 shall be fulfilled. Further, the strip foundation and the floor slab 
shall also be underlain by a rolled coarse gravel capillary cut-off, not less than 150 
mm thick, resting on a compacted fill blanket as illustrated in Figure 11.1(c).  
 
 
 


--- Page 86 ---
DESIGN FOR SABKHA SOILS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
11/3 
 
SECTION 11.4 
REQUIRED PREVENTIVE MEASURES 
 
11.4.1 
The applicable provisions of Section 9.3.5 and Chapter 13 shall be expanded to 
include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
1. Domestic and irrigation water shall be strictly controlled, especially where low 
density sands cemented with sodium chloride. Protection by drainage around 
major structures shall be considered to reduce the risks associated with 
rainstorms or burst water mains. 
2. There shall be external protection against corrosion for all pipelines, fittings 
and valves, whether steel, ductile iron, or asbestos-cement. Ductile iron pipe 
work shall be factory coated with a bituminous coating compatible with a 
specified pipe wrapping material. Steel pipe work shall be factory coated with 
either a thermosetting, fusion bonded, dry powder epoxy coating not less than 
300 micrometers thick or a catalyst-cured epoxy coating applied in three coats, 
to a total cured dry film thickness of 240 micrometers. Ductile iron, steel and 
asbestos-cement pipe work shall then be wrapped with heavy duty self-
adhesive, rubber bitumen compound with PVC carrier strip. The pipe work 
shall be sleeved with 0.2 mm thick polyethylene sleeving. 
 
FIGURE 11.1 
SHALLOW FOUNDATION DESIGN STRATEGIES 
(a) WATER TABLE BELOW 5 m DEPTH; 
 (b) WATER TABLE BETWEEN 2.5 m AND 5 m DEPTH; 
 (c) WATER TABLE BETWEEN GROUND LEVEL AND 2.5 m DEPTH. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 87 ---
DESIGN FOR SABKHA SOILS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
11/4 
 
SECTION 11.5 
CONCRETE 
 
11.5.0 
Material, construction, and placement of concrete shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 5.4.2 and Section 8.3, where applicable.   
 
11.5.1  
Concrete protection. Concrete shall satisfy the durability criteria of SBC 304 
Chapter 4. Protection against salt attack on foundation materials, buried pipes, and 
metal objects shall be provided by using sulphate resistance cement. Concrete used 
in the construction of foundation on sabkha formations shall be made from Type V 
Portland cement, with minimum cement content of 370 kg/m3, and maximum 
water cement ratio of 0.4 for corrosion protection and 0.45 for sulfate protection. 
Reinforcement type shall be epoxy coated and a minimum cover to reinforcement 
of 75 mm shall be stringently enforced. 
 
SECTION 11.6 
REMOVAL OF SABKHA SOILS 
 
   
Where sabkha soil is removed in lieu of designing footings or foundations in 
accordance with Section 11.3.2, the soil shall be removed to a depth sufficient to 
ensure adequate load-bearing and tolerable settlement for the remaining soil. Fill 
material shall not contain sabkha soils and shall comply with the provisions of 
Sections 3.10 or 3.11. 
 
SECTION 11.7 
STABILIZATION 
 
   
Where the sabkha soil is stabilized in lieu of designing footings or foundations in 
accordance with Section 11.3.2, the soil shall be stabilized by stone columns, 
preloading, vibroflotation, or other techniques designed by a geotechnical engineer 
knowledgeable in sabkha soil and approved by the building official. Where 
attempts to densify the upper portion of sabkha material by conventional means, in 
order to improve its bearing capacity and reduce its settlement characteristics, the 
upper, loose portion of sabkha shall be densified, or treated without adversely 
affecting the underlying cemented layers. In pre-wetting technique, the effect of 
strength loss shall be evaluated to ensure that strength criteria are met. Limitations 
and implementation procedures of the contemplated stabilization technique shall 
receive careful consideration and thorough evaluation.  


--- Page 88 ---
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
12/1 
 
CHAPTER 12
 
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
 
SECTION 12.1 
GENERAL 
 
12.1.1 
Where machinery operations or other vibrations are transmitted through the 
foundation, the foundations and support structures shall be designed according to 
Sections 12.2 through 12.4.7. Foundations and support structures designed for 
machinery vibrations must be capable of withstanding dynamic loading due to 
machinery vibrations and all other loadings to which they may be subjected with 
stresses not exceeding the allowable-load bearing values specified in Chapter 4. 
 
SECTION 12.2 
LOADS AND FORCES 
 
12.2.0 
All concrete sections shall be proportioned to resist the sum of the static loads and 
dynamic forces as described in Sections 12.2.1 through 12.2.3.  
 
12.2.1  
Static loads. Static loads shall consist of all dead and live loads on the foundation, 
etc., thermal and fluid forces from process piping, loads due to temperature 
differentials, wind loads and any other sustained loads. 
 
12.2.2  
Transient dynamic forces. If not specified by the equipment manufacturer, 
transient forces consisting of vertical, lateral, and longitudinal forces equal to 25 
percent of the total weight of the machine train and acting through the center 
machine bearing axis shall be used in design. These forces need not be considered 
to act concurrently. For purposes of strength design, the forces shall be treated as 
quasi-static loads.  
For low-tuned systems, dynamic load effects due to transient resonance during 
machine start-up or shut-down shall be considered. For transient response 
calculations, damping effects shall be included to avoid unrealistically high results 
as the frequency ratio passes through the 0.7 to 1.3 range. Unless foundations or 
structures or connecting piping are unusual, response due to transient dynamic 
forces need not be evaluated. 
 
12.2.3  
Steady state dynamic forces. Information on steady state dynamic forces shall be 
furnished by the equipment manufacturer(s). For reciprocating machinery the 
supplied information shall include weights of the machine and all auxiliary 
equipment with exact location of centers of gravity, number of revolutions per 
minute (Operating speed or range of operating speeds), diagrams showing all 
primary and secondary forces and moments, and curves of free forces and 
moments against crank angle degrees.  
For rotating machinery the equipment manufacturer(s) shall supply the weights of 
the machine, rotor and auxiliary equipment with exact location of centers of 
gravity, range of operating speeds, possible unbalanced forces and points of 
application (for operating conditions based on alarm level). 
Where there is no manufacturer information available, the steady state dynamic 
force for rotating machinery can be estimated as follows: 
 


--- Page 89 ---
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
12/2 
 
5.1)
(
001
.0
rpm
W
FD =
                                    (Equation 12-1)  
 
where: 
FD  
=   Steady state dynamic force in kN. 
W  
=   Total mass of the rotating part in kg. 
rpm  
=   Machine speed in revolutions per minute. 
 
SECTION 12.3 
SOIL BEARING PRESSURES, PILE CAPACITIES  
AND SETTLEMENTS 
 
12.3.1 
Foundation adequacy for static bearing capacity and settlement considerations 
shall be checked by a registered design professional. In addition, effect of dynamic 
loading on foundation soil shall be investigated. In-situ or laboratory testing to 
establish appropriate dynamic parameters of the foundation soils, whether in-situ 
treated or untreated, or compacted fill, shall be carried out by an approved agency. 
If a requirement for piles is established, appropriate dynamic parameters for the 
piles shall be determined by an approved agency. 
The site investigation report shall give insight to the expected dynamic behavior of 
the soil or piles. As a minimum the report should give the density, Poisson’s ratio, 
dynamic modulus of sub-grade reaction or dynamic pile spring constant and the 
shear modulus for soils, or the equivalent fixate level of piles.   
Unless foundation settlement calculations for dynamic loads show otherwise, the 
allowable soil bearing pressures shall not exceed 50% of the allowable bearing 
pressure permitted for static loads, as determined from Chapter 4, for high-tuned 
foundations and 75% for low-tuned foundations. The allowable soil bearing 
pressure shall be reduced for heavy machinery foundations to provide a factor of 
safety against excessive settlement due to vibration. 
 
SECTION 12.4 
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
12.4.0 
Foundation and support structures designed for machinery vibrations shall meet 
the provisions of Sections 12.4.1 through 12.4.7 
 
12.4.1  
General. The provisions of Chapters 5 and 8 shall be expanded to include the 
following: 
1. Support structures or foundations for centrifugal rotating machinery greater 
than 500 horsepower shall be designed for the expected dynamic forces using 
dynamic analysis procedures. For units less than 500 horsepower, in the 
absence of a detailed dynamic analysis, the foundation weight shall be at least 
three times the total machinery weight, unless specified otherwise by the 
Manufacturer. 
2. For reciprocating machinery less than 200 horsepower, in the absence of a 
detailed dynamic analysis, the foundation weight shall be at least five times the 
total machinery weight, unless specified otherwise by the Manufacturer.  
3. All coupled elements of the machinery train shall be mounted on a common 
foundation or support structure. 


--- Page 90 ---
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
12/3 
 
4. Foundations for heavy machinery shall be independent of adjacent foundations 
and buildings. Concrete slabs or paving adjacent to the foundation shall have a 
minimum 12 mm isolation joint around the foundation using an approved 
elastic joint filler with sealant on top. Joint filler material shall be an expansion 
joint material according to ACI 504R Guide for Sealing Joints in Concrete 
Structures. Preformed expansion joint filler shall be of the full thickness and 
depth of the joint with splicing only on the length.  
5. The clear distance in any direction between adjacent foundations for heavy 
machinery shall be large enough to avoid transmission of detrimental vibration 
amplitudes through the surrounding soil or the foundations shall be protected 
in other ways. Transmissibility of amplitudes shall be limited to 20 percent 
between adjacent foundations, unless otherwise agreed by the Building 
official. 
6. Where practical and economical, the machine foundation system shall be 
proportioned to be low-tuned. 
7. High-tuned machine foundation systems shall be used only when a low-tuned 
system is not practical or economical. 
8. For elevated machinery, the flexibility of the entire support structure shall be 
considered in the dynamic analysis. 
9. The foundation design shall be capable of resisting all applied dynamic and 
static loads specified by the machinery manufacturer, loads from thermal 
movement, dead and live loads, wind or seismic forces as specified in SBC 
301, any loads that may be associated with installation or maintenance of the 
equipment, and fatigue. For fatigue, the dynamic loads shall be increased by a 
factor of 1.5 and applied as quasi-static loads.  
The applied loads shall be combined to produce the most unfavorable effect on 
the supporting foundations. The effect of both wind and seismic activity need 
not be considered to act simultaneously. Design load combinations shall be as 
specified in Section 2.4 SBC 301 except that strength design of reinforced 
concrete systems and elements shall comply with load combinations specified 
in SBC 304.  
10. Design shall be such that buried cables, pipes etc., will not be incorporated in 
the foundation, and be protected from the influence of foundation stresses. If 
incorporation in the foundation cannot be avoided, cables and pipes shall be 
sleeved. 
11. Where practical, operator platforms shall be independent from the main 
machinery carrying structure(s). 
12. Quantifying whole-body vibration in relation to human health and comfort, the 
probability of vibration perception, and the incidence of motion sickness shall 
conform to International Organization for Standardization ISO 2631-1 
Mechanical Vibration and Shock Evaluation of Human Exposure to Whole-
Body Vibration-Part 1: General Requirements and Evaluation of Human 
Exposure to Whole-Body Vibration-Part 2: Continuous and Shock-induced 
Vibration in Buildings (1 to 80 Hz) ISO 2631-2. 
 


--- Page 91 ---
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
12/4 
 
12.4.2  
Reinforced concrete. The structural design of all reinforced concrete shall be in 
accordance with SBC 304 when not in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 12. 
The following provisions shall be satisfied: 
1. The minimum compressive strength of concrete at 28 days shall not be less 
than 28 MPa.  
2. All faces of concrete shall be reinforced bi-axially. For deformed bars, the 
reinforcement in each direction shall not be less than 0.0018 times the gross 
area perpendicular to the direction of reinforcement. 
Exception: In the event that a foundation size greater than 1200 mm thick is 
required for stability, rigidity, or damping, the minimum reinforcing steel may 
be as recommended in ACI 207.2R Effect of Restraint, Volume Change, and 
Reinforcement on Cracking of Massive Concrete with a suggested minimum 
reinforcement of Dia 22 mm bars at 300 mm on center.  
3. Main reinforcement in piers shall not be less than 1 percent nor more than 8 
percent of the cross-sectional area of the piers. Main reinforcement in pedestals 
shall not be less than 
2
1
percent. 
4. Minimum tie size in piers shall be 12 mm. 
5. Maximum tie spacing in piers shall be the smallest of 8-bar diameters, 24-tie 
diameters or 1/3 the least dimension of the pier. 
6. Slabs with thickness of 500 mm or more shall be provided with shrinkage and 
temperature reinforcement in accordance with applicable provisions of SBC 
304. 
7. When foundation thickness is greater than 1200 mm thick, mix and placement 
of concrete shall conform to the provisions of ACI 207.2R and SBC 304. 
 
12.4.3  
Anchor bolts. Anchor bolts shall be in accordance with SAES-Q-005. When 
specified, the diameter, steel quality, projection and installation method shall be as 
required by the machine manufacturer. Requirements for anchor bolt coating shall 
be in compliance with Saudi Aramco Materials System Reports 12-SAMSS-007 
Fabrication of Structural and Miscellaneous Steel and requirements for double nuts 
shall be in compliance with Saudi Aramco Engineering Standard SAES-Q-005 
Concrete Foundations.  
The foundation design engineer shall verify the capacity of any vendor furnished 
or detailed anchor bolts. Unless otherwise specified by the equipment 
manufacturer, equipment shall be installed on mounting plate(s), and the direct 
attachment of equipment feet to the foundation using the anchor bolts shall not be 
permitted. Mounting plates shall be of sufficient strength and rigidity to transfer 
the applied forces to the foundation. Grouting shall be in accordance with Saudi 
Aramco Engineering Standard SAES-Q-011 Epoxy Grout for machinery Support 
and machine manufacturer’s instructions. 
The drawing shall clearly indicate the locations and types of the anchor bolts and 
sleeves, the anchor bolt diameter, the depth of embedment into the foundation of 
the anchor bolts, the length of the anchor bolts threads, and the length of the 
anchor bolt projections. 
 


--- Page 92 ---
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
12/5 
 
12.4.4  
Stiffness requirements. The foundation must be of sufficient width to prevent 
rocking and adequate depth to permit properly embedded anchor bolts. The width 
of the foundation shall be at least 1.5 times the vertical distance from the base to 
the machine centerline, unless analysis carried out by a registered design 
professional demonstrates that a lesser value will perform adequately. For concrete 
foundations, the weight of the foundation for reciprocating equipment shall not be 
less than 5 times and, for rotary equipment, shall not be less than 3 times the 
weight of the machinery, including its base plate and the piping supported from the 
foundation, unless analysis carried out by a registered design professional 
demonstrates that a lesser value will perform adequately. 
For foundations and piers constructed with normal weight concrete, the dynamic 
modulus of elasticity shall be taken as: 
 
5.0
')
(
6560
c
D
f
E
=
                                   (Equation 12-2) 
 
 
where: 
ED  = Dynamic modulus of elasticity of concrete in MPa.  
 
'
cf  = Compressive strength of concrete at 28 days in MPa. 
 
The minimum thickness of the concrete foundations shall not be less than 
(0.60+L/30) where L is the length of foundation in meters parallel to the machine 
bearing axis in meters. Piers shall not be used unless absolutely required by 
operation or maintenance or if required by machine vendor specification. Block 
foundations for reciprocating machines shall have a minimum of 50 % of the block 
thickness embedded in the soil, unless otherwise specified by the equipment 
manufacturer. 
 
12.4.5  
Allowable eccentricities for concrete foundations with horizontal shaft 
machinery. Secondary moments that could significantly influence the natural 
frequencies of the foundation shall be minimized. The horizontal eccentricity, 
perpendicular to the machine bearing axis, between the center of gravity of the 
machine foundation system and the centroid of the soil contact area (or in case of 
piled foundations, the elastic support point of the pile group) shall not exceed 0.05 
times the width of foundation in meters.  
The horizontal eccentricity, parallel to the bearing axis between the center of 
gravity of the machine foundation system and the centroid of the soil contact area 
(or in the case of piled foundations, the elastic support point of the pile group) 
shall not exceed 0.05 times length of foundation in meters. The machine bearing 
axis and the centroid of the support (soil contact area, or pile group) shall lie in a 
common vertical plane. 
Piers and columns shall be proportioned in such a manner that the centroid of their 
vertical stiffness lies in the same vertical plane as the bearing axis and center of 
gravity of the machinery. 
 
12.4.6  
Permissible frequency ratios. The ratio between the operating frequency of the 
machinery, f, and each natural frequency of the machine foundation system, fn 
shall not lie in the range of 0.7 to 1.3. Accordingly, for high-tuned systems, f/fn, 


--- Page 93 ---
DESIGN FOR VIBRATORY LOADS
 
SBC 303 
2007 
12/6 
 
shall be less than 0.7 and for low-tuned systems f/fn shall be greater than 1.3. A 
need for exceptions shall be approved by a registered design professional. 
 
12.4.7  
Permissible vibration. Where Manufacturer’s vibration criteria are not available, 
the maximum velocity of movement during steady-state normal operation shall be 
limited to 3 mm per second for centrifugal machines and 4 mm per second for 
reciprocating machines. For rocking and torsional mode calculation the vibration 
velocities shall be computed with the dynamic forces of the machinery train 
components assumed in phase and 180 degrees out of phase. 
 
  


--- Page 94 ---
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
 
SBC 303 
2007 
13/1 
 
CHAPTER 13 
DAMP PROOFING AND WATERPROOFING 
 
SECTION 13.1 
SCOPE 
 
13.1.0 
Walls or portions thereof that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors 
below grade, and underground water-retention structures shall be waterproofed 
and damp proofed in accordance with provisions of this Chapter, with the 
exception of those spaces containing groups other than residential and institutional 
where such omission is not detrimental to the building or occupancy.  
Ventilation for crawl spaces shall comply with Section 7.3.4 SBC 201. 
 
13.1.1  
Story above grade. Where a basement is considered a story above grade and the 
finished ground level adjacent to the basement wall is below the basement floor 
elevation for 25 percent or more of the perimeter, the floor and walls shall be 
damp proofed in accordance with Section 13.2 and a foundation drain shall be 
installed in accordance with Section 13.4.2. The foundation drain shall be installed 
around the portion of the perimeter where the basement floor is belowground level. 
The provisions of Sections 2.2.3, 13.3 and 13.4.1 shall not apply in this case. 
 
13.1.2  
Under-floor space. The finished ground level of an under-floor space such as a 
crawl space shall not be located below the bottom of the footings. Where there is 
evidence that the ground-water table rises to within 150 mm of the ground level at 
the outside building perimeter, or that the surface water does not readily drain 
from the building site, the ground level of the under-floor space shall be as high as 
the outside finished ground level, unless an approved drainage system is provided. 
The provisions of Sections 2.2.3, 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4.1 shall not apply in this case. 
13.1.2.1  
Flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, as 
established in SBC 301 Section 5.3, the finished ground level of an under-floor 
space such as a crawl space shall be equal to or higher than the outside finished 
ground level. 
 
Exception: Under-floor spaces of Group R-3 buildings that meet the requirements 
of FEMA/ FIA-TB-11. 
 
13.1.3  
Groundwater control. Where the ground-water table is lowered and maintained 
at an elevation not less than 150 mm below the bottom of the lowest floor, the 
floor and walls shall be damp proofed in accordance with Section 13.2. The design 
of the system to lower the ground-water table shall be based on accepted principles 
of engineering that shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to, permeability of 
the soil, rate at which water enters the drainage system, rated capacity of pumps, 
head against which pumps are to operate and the rated capacity of the disposal area 
of the system. 
 
SECTION 13.2 
DAMP PROOFING REQUIRED 
 
13.2.0 
Where hydrostatic pressure will not occur as determined by Section 2.2.3, floors 
and walls shall be damp proofed in accordance with this Section.  
 


--- Page 95 ---
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
 
SBC 303 
2007 
13/2 
 
13.2.1  
Floors. Damp proofing materials for floors shall be installed between the floor and 
the base course required by Section 13.4.1, except where a separate floor is 
provided above a concrete slab. Where installed beneath the slab, damp proofing 
shall consist of not less than 0.15 mm polyethylene with joints lapped not less than 
150 mm, or other approved methods or materials. Where permitted to be installed 
on top of the slab, damp proofing shall consist of mopped-on bitumen, not less 
than 0.10 mm polyethylene, or other approved methods or materials. Joints in the 
membrane shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions. 
 
13.2.2  
Walls. Damp proofing materials for walls shall be installed on the exterior surface 
of the wall, and shall extend from the top of the footing to above ground level.  
Damp proofing shall consist of a bituminous material, 16 N/m2 of acrylic modified 
cement, 3.0 mm coat of surface-bonding mortar complying with ASTM C 887, 
any of the materials permitted for waterproofing by Section 13.3.2 or other 
approved methods or materials.  
13.2.2.1  
Surface preparation of walls. Prior to application of damp proofing materials on 
concrete walls, holes and recesses resulting from the removal of form ties shall be 
sealed with a bituminous material or other approved methods or materials. Unit 
masonry walls shall be parged on the exterior surface belowground level with not 
less than 10 mm of Portland cement mortar. The parging shall be coved at the 
footing. 
Exception: Parging of unit masonry walls is not required where a material is 
approved for direct application to the masonry. 
 
SECTION 13.3 
WATERPROOFING REQUIRED 
 
13.3.0 
Where the ground-water investigation required by Section 2.2.3 indicates that a 
hydrostatic pressure condition exists, and the design does not include a ground-
water control system as described in Section 13.1.3, walls and floors shall be 
waterproofed in accordance with this Section. 
 
13.3.1  
Floors. Floors required to be water proofed shall be of concrete, designed and 
constructed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures to which the floors will be 
subjected.  
Waterproofing shall be accomplished by placing a membrane of rubberized 
asphalt, butyl rubber, or not less than 0.15 mm polyvinyl chloride with joints 
lapped not less than 150 mm or other approved materials under the slab. Joints in 
the membrane shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions. 
 
13.3.2  
Walls. Walls required to be waterproofed shall be of concrete or masonry and 
shall be designed and constructed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures and other 
lateral loads to which the walls will be subjected.  
Waterproofing shall be applied from the bottom of the wall to not less than 300 
mm above the maximum elevation of the groundwater table. The remainder of the 
wall shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section 13.2.2. Waterproofing shall 
consist of two-ply hot-mopped felts, not less than 0.15 mm polyvinyl chloride, 1.0 


--- Page 96 ---
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
 
SBC 303 
2007 
13/3 
 
mm polymer-modified asphalt, 0.150 mm polyethylene or other approved methods 
or materials capable of bridging nonstructural cracks. Joints in the membrane shall 
be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions. 
13.3.2.1  
Surface preparation of walls. Prior to the application of waterproofing materials 
on concrete or masonry walls, the walls shall be prepared in accordance with 
Section 13.2.2.1. 
 
13.3.3  
Joints and penetrations. Joints in walls and floors, joints between the wall and 
floor and penetrations of the wall and floor shall be made water-tight utilizing 
approved methods and materials. 
 
SECTION 13.4 
SUBSOIL DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
 
13.4.0 
Where a hydrostatic pressure condition does not exist, damp proofing shall be 
provided and a base shall be installed under the floor and a drain installed around 
the foundation perimeter. A subsoil drainage system designed and constructed in 
accordance with Section 13.1.3 shall be deemed adequate for lowering the ground-
water table.  
 
13.4.1  
Floor base course. Floors of basements, except as provided for in Section 13.1.1, 
shall be placed over a floor base course not less than 100 mm in thickness that 
consists of gravel or crushed stone containing not more than 10 percent of material 
that passes through a No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. 
Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel or sand/gravel mixture 
soils, a floor base course is not required.  
 
13.4.2  
Foundation drain. A drain shall be placed around the perimeter of a foundation. 
It shall satisfy the requirements of Equations 7-4 through 7-6 or in lieu it shall 
consist of gravel or crushed stone containing not more than 10-percent material 
that passes through a No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. The drain shall extend a minimum of 
300 mm beyond the outside edge of the footing. The thickness shall be such that 
the bottom of the drain is not higher than the bottom of the base under the floor, 
and that the top of the drain is not less than 150 mm above the top of the footing. 
The top of the drain shall be covered with an approved filter membrane material. 
Where a drain tile or perforated pipe is used, the invert of the pipe or tile shall not 
be higher than the floor elevation. The top of joints or the top of perforations shall 
be protected with an approved filter membrane material. The pipe or tile shall be 
placed on not less than 50 mm of gravel or crushed stone complying with Section 
13.4.1, and shall be covered with not less than 150 mm of the same material. 
 
13.4.3  
Drainage discharge. The floor base and foundation perimeter drain shall 
discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system that 
complies with the SBC 701. 
Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel or sand/gravel mixture 
soils, a dedicated drainage system is not required. 
 
 


--- Page 97 ---
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
 
SBC 303 
2007 
13/4 
 
 
SECTION 13.5 
UNDERGROUND WATER-RETENTION STRUCTURES 
 
13.5.0 
Underground water-retention structures shall meet the provisions of Sections 
13.5.1 through 13.5.4.   
13.5.1  
General requirements. All underground water-retention structures shall meet the 
following requirements: 
1. All internal faces (including the top face) of the water-retention structure shall 
be waterproofed.  
2. Shall not be located under drainage or non-potable water piping. 
3. Shall be provided with a waterproof cover to prevent water and foreign matter 
from entering the tank. The cover shall be large enough to allow access for 
maintenance. 
4. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, 
collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the 
effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
 
13.5.2  
Design and construction. For design and constructions of underground water-
retention structures, provisions of SBC 304 and ACI 350 Environmental 
Engineering Concrete Structures shall govern, where applicable. 
 
13.5.3  
Waterproofing. All internal faces of an underground water-retention structure 
shall be waterproofed (using approved material such as epoxy films, concrete 
admixtures, etc.). All such waterproofing materials in contact with water shall 
neither be toxic nor hazardous to human health. All construction joints shall have 
proper water-stops. All construction holes, recesses, plumbing sleeves etc. shall be 
sealed properly.  
In cases where the floor slab of the water-retention structure is less than one meter 
above the anticipated groundwater level, it is required to provide a base layer of 
compacted granular fill, followed by damp proofing layer as described in Section 
13.2.1. 
In cases where floor slab is below or close to groundwater level, the floor slab and 
all exterior faces of the structure shall be water proofed in accordance with Section 
13.3. In cases where cover slab of the structure is below or close to groundwater 
level, all parts of the structure (including the opening of the water-retention 
structure) shall be waterproofed in accordance with Section 13.3.   
 
13.5.4  
Testing. Following complete application of waterproofing of the structure, and 
before backfilling is permitted; underground water-retention structures shall be 
tested against leakage full of water for a minimum of 48 hours.   
 
  


--- Page 98 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/1 
 
CHAPTER 14
 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
 
PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS
 
 
SECTION 14.1 
DESIGN 
 
14.1.1 
Piles are permitted to be designed in accordance with provisions for piers in 
Chapter 14 and Sections 17.3 through 17.10 where either of the following 
conditions exists, subject to the approval of the building official: 
1. Group R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding two stories of light-frame 
construction, or 
2. Where the surrounding foundation materials furnish adequate lateral support 
for the pile. 
 
SECTION 14.2 
GENERAL 
 
14.2.1 
Pier and pile foundations shall be designed and installed on the basis of a site 
investigation as defined in Chapter 2, unless the building official ascertains that 
sufficient data upon which to base the design and installation is available. 
The investigation and report provisions of Chapter 2 shall be expanded to include, 
but not be limited to, the following: 
1. Recommended pier or pile types and installed capacities. 
2. Recommended center-to-center spacing of piers or piles. 
3. Driving criteria. 
4. Installation procedures. 
5. Field inspection and reporting procedures (to include procedures for 
verification of the installed bearing capacity where required). 
6. Pier or pile load test requirements. 
7. Durability of pier or pile materials. 
8. Designation of bearing stratum or strata. 
9. Reductions for group action, where necessary. 
 
SECTION 14.3 
SPECIAL TYPES OF PILES 
 
14.3.1 
The use of types of piles not specifically mentioned herein is permitted, subject to 
the approval of the building official, upon the submission of acceptable test data, 
calculations and other information relating to the structural properties and load 
capacity of such piles. The allowable stresses shall not in any case exceed the 
limitations specified herein. 
 
 


--- Page 99 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/2 
 
 
SECTION 14.4 
PILE CAPS 
 
14.4.1 
Pile caps shall be of reinforced concrete, and shall include all elements to which 
piles are connected, including grade beams and mats.  The soil immediately below 
the pile cap shall not be considered as carrying any vertical load.  The tops of piles 
shall be embedded not less than 75 mm into pile caps and the caps shall extend at 
least 100 mm beyond the edges of piles. The tops of piles shall be cut back to 
sound material before capping. 
 
SECTION 14.5 
STABILITY 
 
14.5.1 
Piers or piles shall be braced to provide lateral stability in all directions. Three or 
more piles connected by a rigid cap shall be considered braced, provided that the 
piles are located in radial directions from the centeroid of the group not less than 
60 degrees (1 radian) apart. A two-pile group in a rigid cap shall be considered to 
be braced along the axis connecting the two piles. Methods used to brace piers or 
piles shall be subject to the approval of the building official. 
Piles supporting walls shall be driven alternatively in lines spaced at least 300 mm 
apart and located symmetrically under the center of gravity of the wall load 
carried, unless effective measures are taken to provide for eccentricity and lateral 
forces, or the wall piles are adequately braced to provide for lateral stability. A 
single row of piles without lateral bracing is permitted for one-and two-family 
dwellings and lightweight construction not exceeding two stories or 10 m in 
height, provided the centers of the piles are located within the width of the 
foundation wall. 
 
SECTION 14.6 
STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY 
 
14.6.1 
Piers or piles shall be installed in such a manner and sequence as to prevent 
distortion or damage to piles being installed or already in place to extent that such 
distortion or damage affects the structural integrity of the piles. 
 
SECTION 14.7 
SPLICES 
 
14.7.1 
Splices shall be constructed so as to provide and maintain true alignment and 
position of the component parts of the pier or pile during installation and 
subsequent thereto and shall be of adequate strength to transmit the vertical and 
lateral loads and moments occurring at the location of the splice during driving 
and under service loading.  Splices shall develop not less than 50% of the least 
capacity of the pier or pile in bending.  In addition, splices occurring in the upper 3 
m of the embedded portion of the pier or pile shall be capable of resisting at 
allowable working stresses the moment and shear that would result from an 
assumed eccentricity of the pier or pile load of 75 mm, or the pier or pile shall be 
braced in accordance with Section 14.5 to other piers or piles that do not have 
splices in the upper 3 m of embedment. 


--- Page 100 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/3 
 
 
SECTION 14.8 
ALLOWABLE PIER OR PILE LOADS 
 
14.8.1  
Determination of allowable loads. The allowable axial and lateral loads on piers 
or piles shall be determined by an approved formula, load tests or method of 
analysis. 
 
14.8.2  
Driving criteria.  The allowable compressive load on any pile where determined 
by the application of an approved driving formula shall not exceed 360 kN. For 
allowable loads above 360 kN, the wave equation method of analysis shall be used 
to estimate pile drivability of both driving stresses and net displacement per blow 
at the ultimate load.  Allowable loads shall be verified by load tests in accordance 
with Section 14.8.3. The formula or wave equation load shall be determined for 
gravity-drop or power-actuated hammers and the hammer energy used shall be the 
maximum consistent with the size, strength and weight of the driven piles. The use 
of a follower is permitted only with the approval of the building official. The 
introduction of fresh hammer cushion or pile cushion material just prior to final 
penetration is not permitted. 
 
14.8.3  
Load tests. Where design compressive loads per pier or pile are greater than those 
permitted by Section 14.10, or where the design load for any pier or pile 
foundation is in doubt, control test piers or piles shall be tested in accordance with 
ASTM D 1143 or ASTM D 4945. At least one pier or pile shall be test loaded in 
each area of uniform subsoil conditions. Where required by the building official, 
additional piers or piles shall be load tested where necessary to establish the safe 
design capacity. The resulting allowable loads shall not be more than one-half of 
the ultimate load capacity of the test piers or pile as assessed by one of the 
published methods listed in Section 14.8.3.1 with consideration for the test type, 
duration and subsoil. The ultimate load capacity shall be determined by a 
registered design professional, but shall be no greater than two times the test load 
that produces a settlement of 7 mm. In subsequent installation of the balance of 
foundation piles, all piles shall be deemed to have a supporting capacity equal to 
the control pile where such piles are to the same type, size and relative length as 
the test pile; are installed using the same or comparable methods and equipment as 
the test pile; are installed in similar subsoil conditions as the test pile; and, for 
driven piles, where the rate of penetration (e.g., net displacement per blow) of such 
piles is equal to or less than that of the test pile through a comparable driving 
distance. 
14.8.3.1 
Load test evaluation.  It shall be permitted to evaluate pile load tests with any of 
the following methods: 
1. Davison Offset Limit. 
2. Brinch-Hansen 90% Criterion. 
3. Chin-Konder Extrapolation. 
4. Other methods approved by the building official. 
 
14.8.4  
Allowable frictional resistance. The assumed frictional resistance developed by 
any pier or uncased cast-in-place pile shall not exceed one-sixth of the bearing 
value of the soil material at minimum depth as set forth in Table 4.1, up to a 


--- Page 101 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/4 
 
maximum of 25 kPa, unless a greater value is allowed by the building official after 
a soil investigation as specified in Chapter 2 is submitted. Frictional resistance and 
bearing resistance shall not be assumed to act simultaneously unless recommended 
by a soil investigation as specified in Chapter 2. 
 
14.8.5  
Uplift capacity. Where required by the design, the uplift capacity of a single pier 
or pile shall be determined by an approved method of analysis based on a 
minimum factor of safety of three or by load tests conducted in accordance with 
ASTM D 3689. The maximum allowable uplift load shall not exceed the ultimate 
load capacity as determined in Section 14.8.3 divided by a factor of safety of two.  
For pile groups subjected to uplift, the allowable working uplift load for the group 
shall be the lesser of: 
1. The proposed individual pile uplift working load times the number of piles in 
the group. 
2. Two-thirds of the effective weight of the pile group and the soil contained 
within a block defined by the perimeter of the group and the length of the pile. 
 
14.8.6  
Load-bearing capacity. Piers, individual piles and groups of piles shall develop 
ultimate load capacities of at least twice the design working loads in the designated 
load-bearing layers. Analysis shall show that no soil layer underlying the 
designated load-bearing layers causes the load-bearing capacity safety factor to be 
less than two. 
 
14.8.7  
Bent piers or piles. The load-bearing capacity of piers or piles discovered to have 
a sharp or sweeping bend shall be determined by an approved method of analysis 
or by load testing a representative pier or pile. 
 
14.8.8  
Overloads on piers or piles. The maximum compressive load on any pier or pile 
due to mislocation shall not exceed 110 % of the allowable design load. 
 
SECTION 14.9 
LATERAL SUPPORT 
 
14.9.1  
General.  Any soil other than fluid soil shall be deemed to afford sufficient lateral 
support to the pier or pile to prevent buckling and to permit the design of the pier 
or pile in accordance with accepted engineering practice and the applicable 
provisions of this code. 
 
14.9.2  
Unbraced piles. Piles standing unbraced in air, water or in fluid soils shall be 
designed as columns in accordance with the provisions of this code.  Such piles 
driven into firm ground can be considered fixed and laterally supported at 1.5 m 
below the ground surface and in soft material at 3 m below the ground surface 
unless otherwise prescribed by the building official after a foundation investigation 
by an approved agency. 
 
14.9.3  
Allowable lateral load.  Where required by the design, the lateral load capacity of 
a pier, a single pile or a pile group shall be determined by an approved method of 
analysis or by lateral load tests to at least twice the proposed design working load.  
The resulting allowable load shall not be more than one-half of that test load that 
produces a gross lateral movement of 25 mm at the ground surface. 
 


--- Page 102 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/5 
 
SECTION 14.10 
USE OF HIGHER ALLOWABLE PIER OR PILE STRESSES 
 
 
14.10.1 
Allowable stresses greater than those specified for piers or for each pile type in 
Chapters 14 and 15 are permitted where supporting data justifying such higher 
stresses is filed with the building official. Such substantiating data shall include: 
1. A soil investigation in accordance with Chapter 2. 
2. Pier or pile load tests in accordance with Section 14.8.3, regardless of the load 
supported by the pier or pile. 
The design and installation of the pier or pile foundation shall be under the direct 
supervision of a registered design professional knowledgeable in the field of soil 
mechanics and pier or pile foundations who shall certify to the building official 
that the piers or piles as installed satisfy the design criteria. 
 
SECTION 14.11 
PILES IN SUBSIDING AND CALCAREOUS AREAS 
 
14.11.1  
Piles in subsiding areas. Where piles are driven through subsiding fills or other 
subsiding strata and derive support from underlying firmer materials, consideration 
shall be given to the downward frictional forces that may be imposed on the piles 
by the subsiding upper strata. 
 
 
Where the influence of subsiding fills is considered as imposing loads on the pile, 
the allowable stresses specified in this chapter are permitted to be increased where 
satisfactory substantiating data are submitted. 
 
14.11.2  
Piles in calcareous soils. Where piles are driven through calcareous soils and 
derive support from frictional forces developed between the pile and the 
surrounding soil, consideration shall be given to loss of frictional forces due to 
driving. For bored cast in-situ piles within calcareous soils where support is 
derived from both friction and tip resistance, consideration shall be given to the 
possibility of presence of voids/cavities below the tip of the bored pile. 
 
SECTION 14.12 
SETTLEMENT ANALYSIS 
 
14.12.1 
The settlement of piers, individual piles or groups of piles shall be estimated based 
on approved methods of analysis.  The predicted settlement shall cause neither 
harmful distortion of, nor instability in, the structure, nor cause any stresses to 
exceed allowable values. 
 
SECTION 14.13 
PREEXCAVATION 
 
14.13.1 
The use of jetting, augering or other methods of preexcavation shall be subject to 
the approval of the building official.  Where permitted, preexcavation shall be 
carried out in the same manner as used for piers or piles subject to load tests and in 
such a manner that will not impair the carrying capacity of the piers or piles 
already in place or damage adjacent structures.  Pile tips shall be driven below the 
preexcavated depth until the required resistance or penetration is obtained. 
 


--- Page 103 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/6 
 
SECTION 14.14 
INSTALLATION SEQUENCE 
 
14.14.1 
Piles shall be installed in such sequence as to avoid compacting the surrounding 
soil to the extent that other piles cannot be installed properly, and to prevent 
ground movements that are capable of damaging adjacent structures. 
 
SECTION 14.15 
USE OF VIBRATORY DRIVERS 
 
14.15.1 
Vibratory drivers shall only be used to install piles where the pile load capacity is 
verified by load tests in accordance with Section 14.8.3. The installation of 
production piles shall be controlled according to power consumption, rate of 
penetration or other approved means that ensure pile capacities equal or exceed 
those of the test piles. 
 
SECTION 14.16 
PILE DRIVABILITY 
 
14.16.1 
Pile cross sections shall be of sufficient size and strength to withstand driving 
stresses without damage to the pile, and to provide sufficient stiffness to transmit 
the required driving forces. 
 
SECTION 14.17 
PROTECTION OF PILE MATERIALS 
 
14.17.1 
Where boring records or site conditions indicate possible deleterious action on pier 
or pile materials because of soil constituents, changing water levels or other 
factors, the pier or pile materials shall be adequately protected by materials, 
methods or processes approved by the building official. Protective materials shall 
be applied to the piles so as not to be rendered ineffective by driving. The 
effectiveness of such protective measures for the particular purpose shall have 
been thoroughly established by satisfactory service records or other evidence. 
  
SECTION 14.18 
USE OF EXISTING PIERS OR PILES 
 
14.18.1 
Piers or piles left in place where a structure has been demolished shall not be used 
for the support of new construction unless satisfactory evidence is submitted to the 
building official, which indicates that the piers or piles are sound and meet the 
requirements of this code. Such piers or piles shall be load tested or redriven to 
verify their capacities.  The design load applied to such piers or piles shall be the 
lowest allowable load as determined by tests or redriving data. 
 
SECTION 14.19 
HEAVED PILES 
 
14.19.1 
Piles that have heaved during the driving of adjacent piles shall be redriven as 
necessary to develop the required capacity and penetration, or the capacity of the 
pile shall be verified by load tests in accordance with Section 14.8.3. 
 
 


--- Page 104 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/7 
 
SECTION 14.20 
IDENTIFICATION 
 
14.20.1 
Pier or pile materials shall be identified for conformity to the specified grade with 
this identity maintained continuously from the point of manufacture to the point of 
installation or shall be tested by an approved agency to determine conformity to 
the specified grade. The approved agency shall furnish an affidavit of compliance 
to the building official. 
 
SECTION 14.21 
PIER OR PILE LOCATION PLAN 
 
14.21.1 
A plan showing the location and designation of piers or piles by an identification 
system shall be filed with the building official prior to installation of such piers or 
piles. Detailed records for piers or individual piles shall bear an identification 
corresponding to that shown on the plan. 
 
SECTION 14.22 
SPECIAL INSPECTION 
 
14.22.1 
Special inspections in accordance with Sections 2.7.6 and 2.7.7, SBC 302 shall be 
provided for piles and piers, respectively. 
 
SECTION 14.23 
SEISMIC DESIGN OF PIERS OR PILES 
 
14.23.1  
Seismic design category C. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic Design 
Category C in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 through 16, the following 
shall apply.  Individual pile caps, piers or piles shall be interconnected by ties.  
Ties shall be capable of carrying, in tension and compression, a force equal to the 
product of the larger pile cap or column load times the seismic coefficient, SDS, 
divided by 10 unless it can be demonstrated that equivalent restraint is provided by 
reinforced concrete beams within slabs on grade or reinforced concrete slabs on 
grade or confinement by competent rock, hard cohesive soils or very dense 
granular soils. 
Exception:  Piers supporting foundation walls, isolated interior posts detailed so 
the pier is not subject to lateral loads, lightly loaded exterior decks and patios, of 
Group R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding two stories of light-frame 
construction, are not subject to interconnection if it can be shown the soils are of 
adequate stiffness, subject to the approval of the building official. 
14.23.1.1  
Connection to pile cap. Concrete piles and concrete-filled steel pipe piles shall be 
connected to the pile cap by embedding the pile reinforcement or field-placed 
dowels anchored in the concrete pile in the pile cap for a distance equal to the 
development length.  For deformed bars, the development length is the full 
development length for compression or tension, in the case of uplift, without 
reduction in length for excess area. Alternative measures for laterally confining 
concrete and maintaining toughness and ductile-like behavior at the top of the pile 
will be permitted provided the design is such that any hinging occurs in the 
confined region.   
Ends of hoops, spirals and ties shall be terminated with seismic hooks, as defined 
in Section 21.1 of SBC 304, turned into the confined concrete core. The minimum 


--- Page 105 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/8 
 
transverse steel ratio for confinement shall not be less than one-half of that 
required for columns. 
For resistance to uplift forces, anchorage of steel pipe (round HSS sections), 
concrete-filled steel pipe or H-piles to the pile cap shall be made by means other 
than concrete bond to the bare steel section. 
Exception: Anchorage of concrete-filled steel pipe piles is permitted to be 
accomplished using deformed bars developed into the concrete portion of the pile. 
Splices of pile segments shall develop the full strength of the pile, but the splice 
need not develop the nominal strength of the pile in tension, shear and bending 
when it has been designed to resist axial and shear forces and moments from the 
load combinations of Section 2.5 SBC 301. 
14.23.1.2  
Design details. Piers or pile moments, shears and lateral deflections used for 
design shall be established considering the nonlinear interaction of the shaft and 
soil, as recommended by a registered design professional.  Where the ratio of the 
depth of embedment of the pile-to-pile diameter or width is less than or equal to 
six, the pile may be assumed to be rigid. 
Pile group effects from soil on lateral pile nominal strength shall be included 
where pile center-to-center spacing in the direction of lateral force is less than 
eight pile diameters. Pile group effects on vertical nominal strength shall be 
included where pile center-to-center spacing is less than three pile diameters.  The 
pile uplift soil nominal strength shall be taken as the pile uplift strength as limited 
by the frictional force developed between the soil and the pile. 
Where a minimum length for reinforcement or the extent of closely spaced 
confinement reinforcement is specified at the top of the pier or pile, provisions 
shall be made so that those specified lengths or extents are maintained after pier or 
pile cutoff. 
14.23.2  
Seismic design category D. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic Design 
Category D in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 through 16, the requirements 
for Seismic Design Category C given in Section 14.23.1 shall be met, in addition 
to the following.  Provisions of SBC 304 shall apply when not in conflict with the 
provisions of Chapter 14 through 17.    
14.23.2.1  
Design details for piers, piles and grade beams. Piers or piles shall be designed 
and constructed to withstand maximum imposed curvatures from earthquake 
ground motions and structure response. Curvatures shall include free-field soil 
strains modified for soil-pile-structure interaction coupled with pier or pile 
deformations induced by lateral pier or pile resistance to structure seismic forces.  
Concrete piers or piles on Site Class E or F sites shall be designed and detailed in 
accordance with Sections 21.4.4.1, 21.4.4.2 and 21.4.4.3 of SBC 304 within seven 
pile diameters of the pile cap and the interfaces of soft to medium stiff clay or 
liquefiable strata. For precast prestressed concrete piles, detailing provisions as 
given in Sections 15.2.3.2.1 and 15.2.3.2.2 shall apply. 
Grade beams shall be designed as beams in accordance with SBC 304, Chapter 21. 
When grade beams have the capacity to resist the forces from the load 
combinations in Section 2.5 SBC 301, they need not conform to Chapter 21 SBC 
304. 
14.23.2.2  
Connection to pile cap. For piles required to resist uplift forces or provide 
rotational restraint, design of anchorage of piles into the pile cap shall be provided 


--- Page 106 ---
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PIER AND PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
14/9 
 
considering the combined effect of axial forces due to uplift and bending moments 
due to fixity to the pile cap. Anchorage shall develop a minimum of 25% of the 
strength of the pile in tension. Anchorage into the pile cap shall be capable of 
developing the following: 
1. In the case of uplift, the lesser of the nominal tensile strength of the 
longitudinal reinforcement in a concrete pile, or the nominal tensile strength of 
a steel pile, or the pile uplift soil nominal strength factored by 1.3 or the axial 
tension force resulting from the load combinations of Section 2.5 SBC 301. 
2. In the case of rotational restraint, the lesser of the axial and shear forces, and 
moments resulting from the load combinations of Section 2.5 SBC 301 or 
development of the full axial, bending and shear nominal strength of the pile. 
14.23.2.3  
Flexural strength. Where the vertical lateral-force-resisting elements are 
columns, the grade beam or pile cap flexural strengths shall exceed the column 
flexural strength. 
The connection between batter pile and grade beams or pile caps shall be designed 
to resist the nominal strength of the pile acting as a short column.  Batter piles and 
their connection shall be capable of resisting forces and moments from the load 
combinations of Section 2.5 SBC 301. 
  


--- Page 107 ---
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
15/1 
 
CHAPTER 15
  
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS
  
 
SECTION 15.1 
PRECAST CONCRETE PILES 
 
15.1.1  
General. The materials, reinforcement and installation of precast concrete piles 
shall conform to Sections 15.1.1.1 through 15.1.1.4.  
15.1.1.1  
Design and manufacture. Piles shall be designed and manufactured in 
accordance with accepted engineering practice to resist all stresses induced by 
handling, driving and service loads. 
15.1.1.2  
Minimum dimension. The minimum lateral dimension shall be 200 mm.  Corners 
of square piles shall be chamfered. 
15.1.1.3  
Reinforcement. Longitudinal steel shall be arranged in a symmetrical pattern and 
be laterally tied with steel ties or wire spiral spaced not more than 100 mm apart, 
center to center, for a distance of 600 mm from the ends of the pile; and not more 
than 150 mm elsewhere except that at the ends of each pile, the first five ties or 
spirals shall be spaced 25 mm center to center.  The gage of ties and spirals shall 
be as follows: 
a. For piles having a diameter of 400 mm or less, wire shall not be smaller than 6 
mm (No. 5 gage). 
b. For piles having a diameter of 400 mm and less than 500 mm, wire shall not be 
smaller than 6 mm (No. 4 gage). 
c. For piles having a diameter of 500 mm and larger, wire shall not be smaller 
than 7 mm (No. 3 gage). 
15.1.1.4  
Installation. Piles shall be handled and driven so as not to cause injury or 
overstressing, which affects durability or strength. 
 
15.1.2  
Precast nonprestressed piles. Precast nonprestressed concrete piles shall conform 
to Sections 15.1.2.1 through 15.1.2.5. 
15.1.2.1  
Materials.  Concrete shall have a 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) of 
not less than 20 MPa.   
15.1.2.2  
Minimum reinforcement. The minimum amount of longitudinal reinforcement 
shall be 0.8 percent of the concrete section and shall consist of at least four bars. 
15.1.2.2.1  Seismic reinforcement in seismic design category C. Where a structure is 
assigned to Seismic Design Category C in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 
through 16, the following shall apply. Longitudinal reinforcement with a minimum 
steel ratio of 0.01 shall be provided throughout the length of precast concrete piles. 
Within three pile diameters of the bottom of the pile cap, the longitudinal 
reinforcement shall be confined with closed ties or spirals of a minimum 10 mm 
diameter. Ties or spirals shall be provided at a maximum spacing of eight times 
the diameter of the smallest longitudinal bar, not to exceed 150 mm. Throughout 
the remainder of the pile, the closed ties or spirals shall have a maximum spacing 
of 16 times the smallest longitudinal-bar diameter, not to exceed 200 mm. 
15.1.2.2.2  Seismic reinforcement in seismic design category D. Where a structure is 
assigned to Seismic Design Category D in accordance with  Chapters 9 through 16 


--- Page 108 ---
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
15/2 
 
SBC 301, the requirements for Seismic Design Category C in Section 15.1.2.2.1 
shall apply except as modified by this section. Transverse confinement 
reinforcement consisting of closed ties or equivalent spirals shall be provided in 
accordance with Sections 21.4.4.1, 21.4.4.2 and 21.4.4.3 of SBC 304 within three 
pile diameters of the bottom of the pile cap. For other than liquefiable sites and 
where spirals are used as the transverse reinforcement, it shall be permitted to use 
a volumetric ratio of spiral reinforcement of not less than one-half that required by 
Section 21.4.4.1(a) of SBC 304. 
15.1.2.3  
Allowable stresses.  The allowable compressive stress in the concrete shall not 
exceed 33 percent of the 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) applied to the 
gross cross-sectional area of the pile.  The allowable compressive stress in the 
reinforcing steel shall not exceed 40 percent of the yield strength of the steel (
yf ) 
or a maximum of 210 MPa. The allowable tensile stress in the reinforcing steel 
shall not exceed 50 percent of the yield strength of the steel (
yf ) or a maximum of 
165 MPa. 
15.1.2.4  
Installation. A precast concrete pile shall not be driven before the concrete has 
attained a compressive strength of at least 75 percent of the 28-day specified 
compressive strength (
'
cf ), but not less than the strength sufficient to withstand 
handling and driving forces. 
15.1.2.5  
Concrete cover. Reinforcement for piles that are not manufactured under plant 
conditions shall have a concrete cover of not less than 50 mm. 
Reinforcement for piles manufactured under plant control conditions shall have a 
concrete cover of not less than 30 mm for Dia 16 mm bars and smaller, and not 
less than 40 mm for Dia 18 mm through Dia 36 mm bars except that longitudinal 
bars spaced less than 40 mm clear distance apart shall be considered bundled bars 
for which the minimum concrete cover shall be equal to that for the equivalent 
diameter of the bundled bars. 
Reinforcement for piles exposed to seawater shall have a concrete cover of not less 
than 75 mm. 
 
15.1.3  
Precast prestressed piles. Precast prestressed concrete piles shall conform to the 
requirements of Sections 15.1.3.1 through 15.1.3.5. 
15.1.3.1  
Materials. Prestressing steel shall conform to ASTM A416.  Concrete shall have a 
28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) of not less than 35 MPa. 
15.1.3.2  
Design. Precast prestressed piles shall be designed to resist stresses induced by 
handling and driving as well as by loads. The effective prestress in the pile shall 
not be less than 3 MPa for piles up to 9 meters in length, 4 MPa for piles up to 15 
meters in length and 5 MPa for piles greater than 15 m in length. 
Effective prestress shall be based on an assumed loss of 210 MPa in the 
prestressing steel. The tensile stress in the prestressing steel shall not exceed the 
values specified in SBC 304. 
15.1.3.2.1  Design in seismic design category C.  Where a structure is assigned to Seismic 
Design Category C in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 through 16, the 
following shall apply. The minimum volumetric ratio of spiral reinforcement shall 
not be less than 0.007 or the amount required by the following formula for the 
upper 6000 mm of the pile. 


--- Page 109 ---
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
15/3 
 
 
yh
c
s
f
f '
12
.0
=
ρ
                                         
          (Equation 15-1) 
        
 where: 
'
cf   = Specified compressive strength of concrete, MPa. 
yh
f
= Yield strength of spiral reinforcement ≤ 586 MPa. 
s
ρ  =  Spiral reinforcement index (vol. Spiral/vol. core). 
 
At least one-half the volumetric ratio required by Equation 15-1 shall be provided 
below the upper 6000 mm of the pile. 
The pile cap connection by means of dowels as indicated in Section 14.23.1 is 
permitted. Pile cap connection by means of developing pile reinforcing strand is 
permitted provided that the pile reinforcing strand results in a ductile connection. 
15.1.3.2.2  Design in seismic design category D. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic 
Design Category D, in accordance with Chapters 9 through 16, SBC 301, the 
requirements for Seismic Design Category C in Section 15.1.3.2.1 shall be met, in 
addition to the following:  
1. Requirements in Chapter 21, SBC 304, need not apply, unless specifically 
referenced. 
2. Where the total pile length in the soil is 10 meters or less, the lateral transverse 
reinforcement in the ductile region shall occur through the length of the pile.  
Where the pile length exceeds 10 m, the ductile pile region shall be taken as 
the greater of 10 m or the distance from the underside of the pile cap to the 
point of zero curvature plus three times the least pile dimension. 
3. In the ductile region, the center-to-center spacing of the spirals or hoop 
reinforcement shall not exceed one-fifth of the least pile dimension, six times 
the diameter of the longitudinal strand, or 200 mm, whichever is smaller. 
4. Circular spiral reinforcement shall be spliced by lapping one full turn and 
bending the end of the spiral to a 90-degree hook or by use of a mechanical or 
welded splice complying with Section 12.14.3 of SBC 304. 
5. Where the transverse reinforcement consists of circular spirals, the  volumetric 
ratio of spiral transverse reinforcement in the ductile region shall comply with 
the following: 
 
s
ρ = 0.25(
'
cf /
yh
f
)(Ag/Ach - 1.0)[0.5 + 1.4P/(
'
cf Ag)]        (Equation 15-2) 
 
but not less than: 
 
s
ρ = 0.12(
'
cf /
yh
f
)[0.5 + 1.4P/(
'
cf Ag)]                             (Equation 15-3) 
 
and need not exceed: 
 
s
ρ = 0.021     
              
               
 
    (Equation 15-4) 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 110 ---
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
15/4 
 
where: 
 
Ag 
= Pile cross-sectional area, mm2. 
Ach = Core area defined by spiral outside diameter, mm2. 
'
cf  
= Specified compressive strength of concrete, MPa. 
yh
f
 = Yield strength of spiral reinforcement ≤ 580 MPa. 
P 
= Axial load pile, kN, as determined from Section 2.3.2 SBC 301 
Combinations (5, 6, and 7). 
s
ρ  
= Volumetric ratio (vol. spiral/vol. core). 
 
This required amount of spiral reinforcement is permitted to be obtained by 
providing an inner and outer spiral. 
6. When transverse reinforcement consists of rectangular hoops and cross ties, 
the total cross-sectional area of lateral transverse reinforcement in the ductile 
region with spacing, and perpendicular to dimension, hc, shall conform to: 
 
   Ash = 0.3shc (
'
cf /
yh
f
)(Ag/Ach -1.0)[0.5 + 1.4P/(
'
cf Ag)]  
  (Equation 15-5) 
 
but not less than: 
 
 
      Ash = 0.12shc (
'
cf /
yh
f
)[0.5 + 1.4P/(
'
cf Ag)]                    
(Equation 15-6) 
 
 
where: 
yh
f
  =  ≤ 480 MPa. 
hc     =  Cross-sectional dimension of pile core measured center to center of  hoop 
reinforcement, mm. 
s      =  Spacing of transverse reinforcement measured along length of pile, mm. 
Ash   =  Cross-sectional area of transverse reinforcement, mm2. 
'
cf
   = Specified compressive strength of concrete, MPa. 
 
The hoops and cross ties shall be deformed bars not less than Dia 10 mm in size. 
Rectangular hoop ends shall terminate at a corner with seismic hooks. 
Outside of the length of the pile requiring transverse confinement reinforcing, the 
spiral or hoop reinforcing with a volumetric ratio not less than one-half of that 
required for transverse confinement reinforcing shall be provided. 
15.1.3.3  
Allowable stresses. The maximum allowable design compressive stress,
cf , in 
concrete shall be determined as follows: 
 
pc
c
c
f
f
f
27
.0
33
.0
' −
=
                                  
(Equation 15-7) 
     
where: 
'
cf   = The 28-day specified compressive strength of the concrete. 
pc
f
 = The effective prestress stress on the gross section. 
15.1.3.4  
Installation. A prestressed pile shall not be driven before the concrete has attained 
a compressive strength of at least 75 percent of the 28-day specified compressive 


--- Page 111 ---
DRIVEN PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
15/5 
 
strength (
'
cf ), but not less than the strength sufficient to withstand handling and 
driving forces. 
15.1.3.5  
Concrete cover. Prestressing steel and pile reinforcement shall have a concrete 
cover of not less than 30mm for square piles of 300 mm or smaller size and 40 mm 
for larger piles, except that for piles exposed to seawater, the minimum protective 
concrete cover shall not be less than 70 mm. 
 
 
 
SECTION 15.2 
STRUCTURAL STEEL PILES 
 
15.2.1  
General. Structural steel piles shall conform to the requirements of Sections 
15.2.2 through 15.2.5. 
 
15.2.2  
Materials.  Structural steel piles, steel pipe and fully welded steel piles fabricated 
from plates shall conform to ASTM A36, ASTM A252, ASTM A283, ASTM 
A572, ASTM A588 or ASTM A913. 
 
15.2.3  
Allowable stresses.  The allowable axial stresses shall not exceed 35 percent of 
the minimum specified yield strength (
yf ). 
Exception: Where justified in accordance with Section 14.10, the allowable axial 
stress is permitted to be increased above 0.35
yf , but shall not exceed 0.5
yf . 
 
15.2.4  
Dimensions of H-piles.  Sections of H-piles shall comply with the following: 
1. The flange projections shall not exceed 14 times the minimum thickness of 
metal in either the flange or the web and the flange widths shall not be less 
than 80 percent of the depth of the section. 
2. The nominal depth in the direction of the web shall not be less than 200 mm. 
3. Flanges and web shall have a minimum nominal thickness of 10 mm. 
 
15.2.5  
Dimensions of steel pipe piles.  Steel pipe piles driven open ended shall have a 
nominal outside diameter of not less than 200 mm. The pipe shall have a minimum 
of 220 mm2 of steel in cross section to resist each 1360 N-m of pile hammer 
energy or the equivalent strength for steels having a yield strength greater than 240 
MPa. Where pipe wall thickness less than 5 mm is driven open ended, a suitable 
cutting shoe shall be provided. 
  


--- Page 112 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/1 
 
CHAPTER 16 
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE 
 PILE FOUNDATIONS  
 
SECTION 16.1 
GENERAL 
 
16.1.0 
The materials, reinforcement and installation of cast-in-place concrete piles shall 
conform to Sections 16.1.1 through 16.1.3. 
 
16.1.1  
Materials.  Concrete shall have a 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) of 
not less than 20 MPa. Where concrete is placed through a funnel hopper at the top 
of the pile, the concrete mix shall be designed and proportioned so as to produce a 
cohesive workable mix having a slump of not less than 100 mm and not more than 
150 mm.  Where concrete is to be pumped, the mix design including slump shall 
be adjusted to produce a pumpable concrete. 
 
16.1.2  
Reinforcement.  Except for steel dowels embedded 1.5 m or less in the pile and as 
provided in Section 16.3.4, reinforcement where required shall be assembled and 
tied together and shall be placed in the pile as a unit before the reinforced portion 
of the pile is filled with concrete except in augered uncased cast-in-place piles. 
Tied reinforcement in augered uncased cast-in-place piles shall be placed after 
piles are concreted, while the concrete is still in a semifluid state. 
16.1.2.1  
Reinforcement in seismic design category C. Where a structure is assigned to 
Seismic Design Category C in accordance with Chapters 9 through 16, SBC 301, 
the following shall apply. A minimum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 0.0025 
shall be provided for uncased cast-in-place concrete drilled or augered piles, piers 
or caissons in the top one-third of the pile length, a minimum length of 3 m below 
the ground or that required by analysis, whichever length is greatest. The 
minimum reinforcement ratio, but no less than that ratio required by rational 
analysis, shall be continued throughout the flexural length of the pile. There shall 
be a minimum of four longitudinal bars with closed ties (or equivalent spirals) of a 
minimum 10 mm diameter provided at 16-longitudinal-bar diameter maximum 
spacing. Transverse confinement reinforcing with a maximum spacing of 150 mm 
or 8-longitudinal-bar diameters, whichever is less, shall be provided within a 
distance equal to three times the least pile dimension of the bottom of the pile cap.   
16.1.2.2  
Reinforcement in seismic design category D. Where a structure is assigned to 
Seismic Design Category D in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 through 16, 
the requirements for Seismic Design Category C given above shall be met, in 
addition to the following. A minimum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 0.005 
shall be provided for uncased cast-in-place drilled or augered concrete piles, piers 
or caissons in the top one-half of the pile length, a minimum length of 3 m below 
ground or throughout the flexural length of the pile, whichever length is greater.  
The flexural length shall be taken as the length of the pile to a point where the 
concrete section cracking moment strength multiplied by 0.4 exceeds the required 
moment strength at that point. There shall be a minimum of four longitudinal bars 
with transverse confinement reinforcing provided in the pile in accordance with 
Sections 21.4.4.1, 21.4.4.2 and 21.4.4.3 of SBC 304 three times the least pile 
dimension of the bottom of the pile cap.  It shall be permitted to use a transverse 
spiral reinforcing ratio of not less than one-half of that required in Section 21.4.4.1 


--- Page 113 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/2 
 
(a) of SBC 304 for other than liquefiable sites. Tie spacing throughout the 
remainder of the concrete section shall not exceed 12-longitudinal-bar diameters, 
one-half the least dimension of the section, nor 300 mm. Ties shall be a minimum 
of Dia 10 mm bars for piles with a least dimension up to 500 mm, and Dia 12 mm 
for larger piles. 
 
16.1.3  
Concrete placement. Concrete shall be placed in such a manner as to ensure the 
exclusion of any foreign matter and to secure a full-sized shaft.  Concrete shall not 
be placed through water except where a tremie or other approved method is used.  
When depositing concrete from the top of the pile, the concrete shall not be 
chutted directly into the pile but shall be poured in a rapid and continuous 
operation through a funnel hopper centered at the top of the pile. 
 
SECTION 16.2 
ENLARGED BASE PILES 
 
16.2.0 
Enlarged base piles shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.2.1 through 
16.2.5. 
 
16.2.1  
Materials.  The maximum size for coarse aggregate for concrete shall be 20 mm.  
Concrete to be compacted shall have a zero slump.  
 
16.2.2  
Allowable stresses. The maximum allowable design compressive stress for 
concrete not placed in a permanent steel casing shall be 25% of the 28-day 
specified compressive strength (
'
cf ).  Where the concrete is placed in a permanent 
steel casing, the maximum allowable concrete stress shall be 33% of the 28-day 
specified compressive strength (
'
cf ). 
 
16.2.3  
Installation. Enlarged bases formed either by compacting concrete or driving a 
precast base shall be formed in or driven into granular soils.  Piles shall be 
constructed in the same manner as successful prototype test piles driven for the 
project.  Pile shafts extending through peat or other organic soil shall be encased in 
a permanent steel casing.  Where a cased shaft is used, the shaft shall be 
adequately reinforced to resist column action or the annular space around the pile 
shaft shall be filled sufficiently to reestablish lateral support by the soil.  Where 
pile heave occurs, the pile shall be replaced unless it is demonstrated that the pile 
is undamaged and capable of carrying twice its design load. 
 
16.2.4  
Load-bearing capacity.  Pile load-bearing capacity shall be verified by load tests 
in accordance with Section 14.8.3. 
 
16.2.5  
Concrete cover. The minimum concrete cover shall be 70 mm for uncased shafts 
and 25 mm for cased shafts. 
 
SECTION 16.3 
DRILLED OR AUGERED UNCASED PILES 
 
16.3.0 
Drilled or augered uncased piles shall conform to Sections 16.3.1 through 16.3.5. 
 
16.3.1  
Allowable stresses. The allowable design stress in the concrete of drilled uncased 
piles shall not exceed 33 percent of the 28-day specified compressive strength 


--- Page 114 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/3 
 
(
'
cf ).  The allowable design stress in the concrete of augered cast-in-place piles 
shall not exceed 25 percent of the 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ). The 
allowable compressive stress of reinforcement shall not exceed 34 percent of the 
yield strength of the steel or (175 MPa). 
16.3.2  
Dimensions. The pile length shall not exceed 30 times the average diameter.  The 
minimum diameter shall be 300 mm. 
Exception: The length of the pile is permitted to exceed 30 times the diameter, 
provided that the design and installation of the pile foundation are under the direct 
supervision of a registered design professional knowledgeable in the field of soil 
mechanics and pile foundations. The registered design professional shall certify to 
the building official that the piles were installed in compliance with the approved 
construction documents. 
 
16.3.3  
Installation. Where pile shafts are formed through unstable soils and concrete is 
placed in an open-drilled hole, a steel liner shall be inserted in the hole prior to 
placing the concrete. Where the steel liner is withdrawn during concreting, the 
level of concrete shall be maintained above the bottom of the liner at a sufficient 
height to offset any hydrostatic or lateral soil pressure. 
Where concrete is placed by pumping through a hollow-stem auger, the auger shall 
be permitted to rotate in a clockwise direction during withdrawal.  The auger shall 
be withdrawn in a continuous manner in increments of about 300 mm each.  
Concreting pumping pressures shall be measured and maintained high enough at 
all times to offset hydrostatic and lateral earth pressures.  Concrete volumes shall 
be measured to ensure that the volume of concrete placed in each pile is equal to or 
greater than the theoretical volume of the hole created by the auger. Where the 
installation process of any pile is interrupted or a loss of concreting pressure 
occurs, the pile shall be redrilled to 1500 mm below the elevation of the tip of the 
auger when the installation was interrupted or concrete pressure was lost and 
reformed. Augered cast-in-place piles shall not be installed within six pile 
diameters center to center of a pile filled with concrete less than 12 hours old, 
unless approved by the building official.  If the concrete level in any completed 
pile drops during installation of an adjacent pile, the pile shall be replaced. 
 
16.3.4  
Reinforcement. For piles installed with a hollow-stem auger, where full-length 
longitudinal steel reinforcement is placed without lateral ties, the reinforcement 
shall be placed through ducts in the auger prior to filling the pile with concrete. All 
pile reinforcement shall have a concrete cover of not less than 70 mm. 
Exception: Where physical constraints do not allow the placement of the 
longitudinal reinforcement prior to filling the pile with concrete or where partial-
length longitudinal reinforcement is placed without lateral ties, the reinforcement 
is allowed to be placed after the piles are completely concreted but while concrete 
is still in a semifluid state. 
 
16.3.5  
Reinforcement in seismic design category C and D. Where a structure is 
assigned to Seismic Design Category C and D in accordance with Chapters 9 
through 16, SBC 301, the corresponding requirements of Sections 16.1.2.1 and 
16.1.2.2 shall be met. 
 
 


--- Page 115 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/4 
 
 
 
SECTION 16.4 
DRIVEN UNCASED PILES 
 
16.4.0 
Driven uncased piles shall conform to Sections 16.4.1 through 16.4.4. 
 
16.4.1  
Allowable stresses.  The allowable design stress in the concrete shall not exceed 
25 percent of the 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) applied to a cross-
sectional area not greater than the inside area of the drive casing or mandrel. 
 
16.4.2  
Dimensions. The pile length shall not exceed 30 times the average diameter.  The 
minimum diameter shall be 300 mm. 
Exception: The length of the pile is permitted to exceed 30 times the diameter, 
provided that the design and installation of the pile foundation is under the direct 
supervision of a registered design professional knowledgeable in the field of soil 
mechanics and pile foundations. The registered design professional shall certify to 
the building official that the piles were installed in compliance with the approved 
design. 
 
16.4.3  
Installation.  Piles shall not be driven within six pile diameters center to center in 
granular soils or within one-half the pile length in cohesive soils of a pile filled 
with concrete less than 48 hours old unless approved by the building official.  If 
the concrete surface in any completed pile rises or drops, the pile shall be replaced.  
Piles shall not be installed in soils that could cause pile heave. 
 
16.4.4  
Concrete cover.  Pile reinforcement shall have a concrete cover of not less than 70 
mm, measured from the inside face of the drive casing or mandrel. 
 
SECTION 16.5 
STEEL-CASED PILES 
 
16.5.0 
Steel-cased piles shall comply with the requirements of Sections 16.5.1 through 
16.5.4. 
 
16.5.1  
Materials.  Pile shells or casings shall be of steel and shall be sufficiently strong 
to resist collapse and sufficiently water tight to exclude any foreign materials 
during the placing of concrete. Steel shells shall have a sealed tip with a diameter 
of not less than 200 mm. 
 
16.5.2  
Allowable stresses. The allowable design compressive stress in the concrete shall 
not exceed 33 percent of the 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ).  The 
allowable concrete compressive stress shall be 0.40 (
'
cf ) for that portion of the pile 
meeting the conditions specified in Sections 16.5.2.1 through 16.5.2.4. 
16.5.2.1  
Shell thickness. The thickness of the steel shell shall not be less than 
manufacturer’s standard gage No. 14 gage 1.75 mm minimum. 
16.5.2.2  
Shell type. The shell shall be seamless or provided with seams of strength equal to 
the basic material and be of a configuration that will provide confinement to the 
cast-in-place concrete. 


--- Page 116 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/5 
 
16.5.2.3  
Strength. The ratio of steel yield strength (
yf ) to 28-day specified compressive 
strength (
'
cf ) shall not be less than six. 
16.5.2.4  
Diameter. The nominal pile diameter shall not be greater than 400 mm. 
 
16.5.3  
Installation. Steel shells shall be mandrel driven their full length in contact with 
the surrounding soil. 
The steel shells shall be driven in such order and with such spacing as to ensure 
against distortion of or injury to piles already in place.  A pile shall not be driven 
within four and one-half average pile diameters of a pile filled with concrete less 
than 24 hours old unless approved by the building official. Concrete shall not be 
placed in steel shells within heave range of driving. 
 
16.5.4  
Reinforcement. Reinforcement shall not be placed within 25 mm of the steel 
shell. Reinforcing shall be required for unsupported pile lengths or where the pile 
is designed to resist uplift or unbalanced lateral loads. 
16.5.4.1  
Seismic reinforcement. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic Design Category 
C and D in accordance with Chapters 9 through 16, SBC 301, the reinforcement 
requirements for drilled or augered uncased piles in Section 16.3.5 shall be met. 
Exception: A spiral-welded metal casing of a thickness not less than 
manufacturer’s standard gage No. 14 gage 1.75 mm is permitted to provide 
concrete confinement in lieu of the closed ties or equivalent spirals required in an 
uncased concrete pile. Where used as such, the metal casing shall be protected 
against possible deleterious action due to soil constituents, changing water levels 
or other factors indicated by boring records of site conditions. 
 
SECTION 16.6 
CONCRETE-FILLED STEEL PIPE AND TUBE PILES 
 
16.6.0 
Concrete-filled steel pipe and tube piles shall conform to the requirements of 
Sections 16.6.1 through 16.6.5. 
 
16.6.1  
Materials. Steel pipe and tube sections used for piles shall conform to ASTM A 
252 or ASTM A 283. Concrete shall conform to Section 16.1.1.  The maximum 
coarse aggregate size shall be 20 mm. 
 
16.6.2  
Allowable stresses.  The allowable design compressive stress in the concrete shall 
not exceed 33 percent of the 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ).  The 
allowable design compressive stress in the steel shall not exceed 35 percent of the 
minimum specified yield strength of the steel (
yf ), provided 
yf  shall not be 
assumed greater than 250 MPa for computational purposes. 
Exception: Where justified in accordance with Section 16.2, the allowable stresses 
are permitted to be increased to 0.50 
yf . 
 
16.6.3  
Minimum dimensions. Piles shall have a nominal outside diameter of not less 
than 200 mm and a minimum wall thickness in accordance with Section 15.2.5. 
For mandrel-driven pipe piles, the minimum wall thickness shall be 2.5 mm. 
 
16.6.4  
Reinforcement. Reinforcement steel shall conform to Section 16.1.2.  


--- Page 117 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/6 
 
Reinforcement shall not be placed within 25 mm of the steel casing. 
16.6.4.1  
Seismic reinforcement. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic Design   
Category C and D in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 through 16, the 
following shall apply. Minimum reinforcement no less than 0.01 times the cross-
sectional area of the pile concrete shall be provided in the top of the pile with a 
length equal to two times the required cap embedment anchorage into the pile cap, 
but not less than the tension development length of the reinforcement.  The wall 
thickness of the steel pipe shall not be less than 5 mm.   
 
16.6.5  
Placing concrete. The placement of concrete shall conform to Section 16.1.3. 
 
SECTION 16.7 
CAISSON PILES 
 
16.7.0 
Caisson piles shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.7.1 through 16.7.6. 
 
16.7.1  
Construction. Caisson piles shall consist of a shaft section of concrete-filled pipe 
extending to bedrock with an uncased socket drilled into the bedrock and filled 
with concrete. The caisson pile shall have a full-length structural steel core or a 
stub core installed in the rock socket and extending into the pipe portion a distance 
equal to the socket depth. 
 
16.7.2  
Materials. Pipe and steel cores shall conform to the material requirements in 
Section 15.2.  Pipes shall have a minimum wall thickness of 10 mm and shall be 
fitted with a suitable steel-driving shoe welded to the bottom of the pipe.  Concrete 
shall have a 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) of not less than 28 MPa.  
The concrete mix shall be designed and proportioned so as to produce a cohesive 
workable mix with a slump of 100 mm to 150 mm. 
 
16.7.3  
Design. The depth of the rock socket shall be sufficient to develop the full load-
bearing capacity of the caisson pile with a minimum safety factor of two, but the 
depth shall not be less than the outside diameter of the pipe. The design of the rock 
socket is permitted to be predicted on the sum of the allowable load-bearing 
pressure on the bottom of the socket plus bond along the sides of the socket. The 
minimum outside diameter of the caisson pile shall be 450 mm, and the diameter 
of the rock socket shall be approximately equal to the inside diameter of the pile.  
 
16.7.4  
Structural core. The gross cross-sectional area of the structural steel core shall 
not exceed 25 percent of the gross area of the caisson. The minimum clearance 
between the structural core and the pipe shall be 50 mm. Where cores are to be 
spliced, the ends shall be milled or ground to provide full contact and shall be full-
depth welded. 
 
16.7.5  
Allowable stresses. The allowable design compressive stresses shall not exceed 
the following: concrete, 0.33
'
cf ; steel pipe, 0.35
yf  and structural steel core, 0.50 
yf . 
16.7.6  
Installation. The rock socket and pile shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign 
materials before filling with concrete.  Steel cores shall be bedded in cement grout 
at the base of the rock socket.  Concrete shall not be placed through water except 


--- Page 118 ---
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE PILE FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
16/7 
 
where a tremie or other approved method is used. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 16.8 
COMPOSITE PILES 
 
16.8.1  
Composite piles shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.8.2 through 
16.8.5. 
 
16.8.2  
Design.  Composite piles consisting of two or more approved pile types shall be 
designed to meet the conditions of installation. 
 
16.8.3  
Limitation of load. The maximum allowable load shall be limited by the capacity 
of the weakest section incorporated in the pile. 
 
16.8.4  
Splices. Splices between concrete and steel sections shall be designed to prevent 
separation both before and after the concrete portion has set, and to ensure the 
alignment and transmission of the total pile load.  Splices shall be designed to 
resist uplift caused by upheaval during driving of adjacent piles, and shall develop 
the full compressive strength and not less than 50 percent of the tension and 
bending strength of the weaker section. 
 
16.8.5  
Seismic reinforcement. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic Design Category 
C and D in accordance with SBC 301 Chapters 9 through 16, the following shall 
apply.  Where concrete and steel are used as part of the pile assembly, the concrete 
reinforcement shall comply with that given in Sections 16.1.2.1 and 16.1.2.2 or the 
steel section shall comply with Section 15.2.5 or 16.6.4.1. 
 
  


--- Page 119 ---
PIER FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
17/1 
 
CHAPTER 17 
PIER FOUNDATIONS  
 
SECTION 17.1 
GENERAL 
 
17.1.1 
Isolated and multiple piers used as foundations shall conform to the requirements 
of Sections 17.2 through 17.10, as well as the applicable provisions of Chapter 14. 
 
SECTION 17.2 
LATERAL DIMENSIONS AND HEIGHT 
 
17.2.1 
The minimum dimension of isolated piers used as foundations shall be 600 mm, 
and the height shall not exceed 12 times the least horizontal dimension. 
 
SECTION 17.3 
MATERIALS 
 
17.3.1 
Concrete shall have a 28-day specified compressive strength (
'
cf ) of not less than 
20 MPa. Where concrete is placed through a funnel hopper at the top of the pier, 
the concrete mix shall be designed and proportioned so as to produce a cohesive 
workable mix having a slump of not less than 100 mm and not more than 150 mm. 
Where concrete is to be pumped, the mix design including slump shall be adjusted 
to produce a pumpable concrete. 
 
SECTION 17.4 
REINFORCEMENT 
 
17.4.1 
Except for steel dowels embedded 1500 mm or less in the pier, reinforcement 
where required shall be assembled and tied together and shall be placed in the pier 
hole as a unit before the reinforced portion of the pier is filled with concrete. 
Exception: Reinforcement is permitted to be wet set and the 70 mm concrete 
cover requirement be reduced to 50 mm  for Group R-3 and U occupancies not 
exceeding two stories of light-frame construction, provided the construction 
method can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the building official. 
Reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of Section 16.1.2.1 and 16.1.2.2. 
Exceptions: 
1. Isolated piers supporting posts of Group R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding 
two stories of light-frame construction are permitted to be reinforced as 
required by rational analysis but not less than a minimum of one Dia 12 mm 
bar, without ties or spirals, when detailed so the pier is not subject to lateral 
loads and the soil is determined to be of adequate stiffness. 
2. Isolated piers supporting posts and bracing from decks and patios appurtenant 
to Group R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding two stories of light-frame 
construction are permitted to be reinforced as required by rational analysis but 
not less than one Dia 12 mm bar, without ties or spirals, when the lateral load, 
E, to the top of the pier does not exceed 900 N and the soil is determined to be 
of adequate stiffness. 


--- Page 120 ---
PIER FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
17/2 
 
3. Piers supporting the concrete foundation wall of Group R-3 and U occupancies 
not exceeding two stories of light-frame construction are permitted to be 
reinforced as required by rational analysis but not less than two Dia 12 mm 
bars, without ties or spirals, when it can be shown the concrete pier will not 
rupture when designed for the maximum seismic load, Em, and the soil is 
determined to be of adequate stiffness. 
4. Closed ties or spirals where required by Section 16.1.2.2 are permitted to be 
limited to the top 1 m of the piers 3 m or less in depth supporting Group R-3 
and U occupancies of Seismic Design Category D, not exceeding two stories 
of light-frame construction. 
 
SECTION 17.5 
CONCRETE PLACEMENT 
 
17.5.1 
Concrete shall be placed in such a manner as to ensure the exclusion of any foreign 
matter and to secure a full-sized shaft.  Concrete shall not be placed through water 
except where a tremie or other approved method is used.  When depositing 
concrete from the top of the pier, the concrete shall not be chutted directly into the 
pier but shall be poured in a rapid and continuous operation through a funnel 
hopper centered at the top of the pier. 
 
SECTION 17.6 
BELLED BOTTOMS 
 
17.6.1 
Where pier foundations are belled at the bottom, the edge thickness of the bell 
shall not be less than that required for the edge of footings.  Where the sides of the 
bell slope at an angle less than 60 degrees (1 rad) from the horizontal, the effects 
of vertical shear shall be considered. 
 
SECTION 17.7 
MASONRY 
 
17.7.1 
Where the unsupported height of foundation piers exceeds six times the least 
dimension, the allowable working stress on piers of unit masonry shall be reduced 
in accordance with SBC 305. 
 
SECTION 17.8 
CONCRETE 
 
17.8.1 
Where adequate lateral support is not provided, piers shall be constructed of 
reinforced concrete, and shall conform to the requirements for columns in SBC 
304. Where adequate lateral support is furnished by the surrounding materials as 
defined in Section 14.9, piers are permitted to be constructed of reinforced 
concrete, and the requirements of SBC 304 for bearing on concrete shall apply. 
 
SECTION 17.9 
STEEL SHELL 
 
17.9.1 
Where concrete piers are entirely encased with a circular steel shell, and the area 
of the shell steel is considered reinforcing steel, the steel shall be protected under 


--- Page 121 ---
PIER FOUNDATIONS 
SBC 303 
2007 
17/3 
 
the conditions specified in Section 14.17. Horizontal joints in the shell shall be 
spliced to comply with Section 14.7. 
 
SECTION 17.10 
DEWATERING 
 
17.10.1 
Where piers are carried to depths below water level, the piers shall be constructed 
by a method that will provide accurate preparation and inspection of the bottom, 
and the depositing or construction of sound concrete or other masonry in the dry. 
 


--- Page 122 ---
COMMENTARY 
 
REFERENCES 
 
SBC 303 
2007 
R/1 
 
REFERENCES 
 
The following references were consulted in the development of either the newly-
introduced topics or in revising the materials adopted from Chapter 18 of the 
International Building Code (IBC). 
 
References, Chapter 1 
1.1  “McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms”, 4th Edition”, S. 
P. Parker editor-in-Chief, New York, 1989. 
 
References, Chapter 2 
2.1 
“Jordanian Code for Site Investigation”, 1st  Edition, Ministry of Housing and 
Public Works, Jordanian National Building Council, 1992. 
2.2 
Hunt R. E. “Geotechnical Engineering Investigation Manual”, McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, New York, 1984. 
 
References, Chapter 3 
3.1 
 “Structural Code”, Royal Commission for Jubail and Yanbu, 1986. 
3.2 
  “Amendment to the 2003 International Building Code”, City of Las Vegas. 
 
References, Chapter 4 
4.1 
 “Jordanian Code for Footings, Foundations, and Retaining Walls”, 1st Edition, 
Ministry of Housing and Public Works, Jordanian National Building Council, 
1992. 
4.2 
 “Arab Code for Soil Mechanics and Foundation Design and Construction: Part 
3 Shallow Foundations,” Arab League, Council of Ministers for Housing and 
Development, 1997. 
 
References, Chapter 5 
5.1 
 “Jordanian Code for Footings, Foundations, and Retaining Walls”, 1st  
Edition,” Ministry of Housing and Public Works, Jordanian National Building 
Council, 1992. 
 
References, Chapter 7 
7.1 
Design Manual 7.02, “Foundations and Earth Structures”, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, 200 Stovall Street, Alexandria, Virginia, 1986. 
7.2 
EM 1110-2-2502, “Design and Construction of Retaining and Flood Walls”, US 
Corps of Engineers, 1989. 
7.3 
 Bowles, J. E., “Foundation Analysis and Design”, 3rd  Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, New York, 1982. 


--- Page 123 ---
COMMENTARY 
 
REFERENCES 
 
SBC 303 
2007 
R/2 
 
7.4 
 “Foundation Engineering Handbook,” Winterkorn, H. F. and Fang H. Eds., Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York, 1975. 
 
References, Chapter 8 
8.1 
 ACI Committee 336.2R-88, “Suggested Analysis and Design Procedures for 
Combined Footings and Mats”, American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, 
MI, 1993.  
8.2 
 Bowles, J. E., “Foundation Analysis and Design”, 3rd  Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, New York, 1982. 
8.3 
 “Foundation Engineering Handbook,” Winterkorn, H. F. and Fang H. Eds., Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York, 1975. 
8.4 
ACI Committee 318M-02, “Building Code Requirements for Structural 
Concrete ACI 318M-02 and Commentary ACI 318RM-02”, American Concrete 
Institute, Farmington Hills, MI, 2003.  
 
References, Chapter 9 
9.1 
TM 5-818-7 “Foundations in Expansive Soils”, Technical Manual, 
Headquarters, Department of the Army, 1983. 
9.2 
 “Southern Nevada Building Code Amendments,” by Jurisdiction of Clark City, 
City of Las Vegas, Boulder City, City of Mequite, North Las Vegas and City of 
Henderson, 1997. 
9.3 
“Criteria for Selection and Design of Residential Slabs-on-ground”, Building 
Research Advisory Board, National Academy of Sciences, Washington D.C., 
1968.  
9.4 
 Nelson, J. D. and Debora J. M. “Expansive Soils: Problems and Practice in 
Foundation and Pavement Engineering”, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 1992. 
9.5 
 Dhowian, A. W., Erol, O. and Yousef, A. "Evaluation of Expansive Soils and 
Foundation Methodology in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia", King Abdulaziz 
City for Science & Technology, Report No. 32, 1990. 
9.6 
 Chen, F. H. “Foundations on Expansive Soils”, Developments in Geotechnical 
Engineering, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company, 1975. 
9.7 
 “Jordanian Code for Footings, Foundations, and Retaining Walls”, 1st  Edition, 
Ministry of Housing and Public Works, Jordanian National Building Council, 
1992. 
9.8 
ACI Committee 318M-02, “Building Code Requirements for Structural 
Concrete ACI 318M-02 and Commentary ACI 318RM-02”, American Concrete 
Institute, Farmington Hills, MI, 2003.  
9.9 
“Recommended Practice for the Design of Residential Foundations,” Final 
Draft Document, ASCE, Texas Section, 2002. 
9.10   “Amendment to the 2003 International Building Code”, City of Las Vegas. 
 
 


--- Page 124 ---
COMMENTARY 
 
REFERENCES 
 
SBC 303 
2007 
R/3 
 
References, Chapter 10 
10.1 “Building Regulation for Eastern Arriyadh sensitive soils,” (BREA), Arriyadh 
Development Authority, 1996. 
10.2 ACI Committee 318M-02, “Building Code Requirements for Structural 
Concrete ACI 318M-02 and Commentary ACI 318RM-02”, American Concrete 
Institute, Farmington Hills, MI, 2003.  
10.3 Bowels, J. E. “Foundations Analysis and Design”, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill 
Book Company, 1982. 
10.4  Das, B. M. “Principles of Foundation Engineering”,  PWS Engineering, 1984.. 
10.5 “Arab Code for Soil Mechanics and Foundation Design and Construction: Part 
3 Shallow Foundations”, Arab League, Council of Ministers for Housing and 
Development, 1997. 
 
References, Chapter 11 
11.1 Trenter, N. A.. ”Some Geotechnical Problems in the Middle East”, Keynote 
Paper, First Regional Conference in Civil Engineering, Bahrain, p.29, 1989. 
11.2 James, A. N. and Little, A. L. “Geotechnical Aspects of Sabkha at Jubail, Saudi 
Arabia,” Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, Vol. 27, pp. 83-121, 1994. 
11.3 “Structural Code”, Royal Commission for Jubail and Yanbu, 1986. 
11.4 Akili, W. and Torrance, J. K. “The Development and Geotechnical Problems of 
Sabkha, with Preliminary Experiments on the Static Penetration Resistance of 
Cemented Sands,” Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, Vol. 14, pp. 59-
73, 1981. 
11.5 Al-Amoudi, O. S. B. “A Review of the Geotechnical and Construction 
Problems in Sabkha Environment and Methods of Treatment”. The Arabian J. 
for Science and Engineering, Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 407-432, 1995.. 
11.6 Dhowian, A. W. and Erol, A. O. “Ground Conditions and Associated Structural 
Problems in Tabuk and Jazan Regions,” Final Report AR.-8-106, King Saud 
City for Science and Technology (KACST), 1993. 
11.7 ACI Committee 318M-02, “Building Code Requirements for Structural 
Concrete ACI 318M-02 and Commentary ACI 318RM-02”, American Concrete 
Institute, Farmington Hills, MI, 2003.  
 
References, Chapter 12 
12.1 SAES-Q-007 “Foundations and Supporting Structures for Heavy machinery,” 
Saudi Aramco Engineering Standards, Onshore Structure Standards Committee, 
2003. 
 
References, Chapter 13 
13.1 ACI Committee 350, “Environmental Engineering Concrete Structures,” 
American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, MI, 1989.  
 


--- Page 125 ---
 
 
 
INDEX 
SBC 303 
2007 
Index/1 
 
INDEX 
 
BASEMENT WALLS ............................................................................................................................. 7.2.2.4 
Loads  ...................................................................................................................................... 8.2, 10.2 
Waterproofing ................................................................................................................................  13.1, 13.3 
BRICK  ....................................................................................................................................... 6.5, 17.7 
Foundations  ...................................................................................... 1.3, 3.3, 6.8, 8.8, 8.9, 9.3.2, 10.3 
CONCRETE  ...................................................................................................................................... 17.8 
Footings  ................................................................................................................... 1.3, 5.1, 5.4, 5.4.2 
Foundation walls  ............................................................................................................................. 6.1 
CRAWL SPACE  ............................................................................................................................ 13.1.2 
Drainage  ........................................................................................................... 6.7, 7.6.3, 13.4, 13.4.3 
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING  .................................................................. chapter 13 
Required  ........................................................................................................................................ 13.1 
Subsoil drainage system  ................................................................................................................ 13.4 
DEAD LOAD  ..................................................................................................................................... 10.2 
Footing design load  ......................................................................................................................... 5.4 
FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATIONS 
FOUNDATION 
Footing design  ................................................................................................................................. 5.4 
Pier ………………………………… ................................. ……………………..1.3, 14.1, 14.2, 17.1 
Pile  ............................................................................................................................. 1.3, 15.1.1, 16.1 
Seismic provisions  ....................................................................................................... 6.6, 6.9, 14.2.3 
Soils investigation  ................................................................................................................. 2.2.6, 2.4 
Waterproofing and dampproofing  ............................................................................... 13.1, 13.2, 13.3  
INSPECTIONS  ............................................................................................................................... 14.22 
Pile  .................................................................................................................................... 15.1.1, 16.1 
PIER FOUNDATIONS ..................................................................................................................... 17.1  
PILE FOUNDATIONS  ..................................................................................................................... 16.1 
Base piles, enlarged concrete  ........................................................................................................ 16.2 
Caisson  ................................................................................................................................... 1.3, 16.7 
Composite  ..................................................................................................................................... 16.8 
Concrete, cast-in-place  .................................................................................................................. 16.1 
Concrete, precast  ........................................................................................................................... 15.1 
Concrete-filled steel pipe and tube ......................................................................................... 1.3, 16.6 
Drilled or augered uncased  ........................................................................................................... 16.3 
Driven ............................................................................................................................................ 16.4 
Pile load, allowable  ....................................................................................................................... 14.8 
Seismic design ............................................................................................................................. 14.23 
Steel, structural .............................................................................................................................. 15.2 
Steel-cased  .................................................................................................................................... 15.5 
SEISMIC  ................................................................................................................................... 5.6, 14.23 
Piers or piles  .............................................................................................................. 14.23, 15.1.3.2.1 
Soils investigation  .............................................................................................................. 2.2.5, 2.2.6 
Ties, concrete footings  ................................................................................................................. 5.4.2 
Ties, pile foundation  ............................................................................................................ 14.1, 14.2 
SOIL AND FOUNDATIONS 
Classification  ................................................................................................................................... 2.3 


--- Page 126 ---
 
 
 
INDEX 
SBC 303 
2007 
Index/2 
 
Depth of footings  ............................................................................................................................ 5.2 
Excavation, grading and fill  ............................................................................................................ 3.1 
Expansive  ....................................................................................................................... 1.3, 2.3.2, 9.1 
Footings and foundations  ................................................................................................................ 1.2 
Footings on or adjacent to slopes  .................................................................................................... 5.3 
Foundation walls  ............................................................................................................................. 6.1 
Foundations, pile and pier  .................................................................................................... 14.1, 14.2 
Grading .............................................................................................................................. 3.7, 3.7, 3.8 
Investigation  .................................................................................................................................... 2.4 
Investigation, seismic  .......................................................................................................... 2.2.5, 2.26 
Loadbearing values  ........................................................................................................... 4.1, 4.1, 4.4 
Soil boring and sampling  .............................................................................................................. 12.3 
Testing, piles  .............................................................................................................................. 14.8.7 
STEEL  ............................................................................................................................................... 16.5 
Piles  ................................................................................................................................................ 1.3 
STRUCTURAL DESIGN  ..................................................................................................... 12.4.2, 14.6 
Foundations  ......................................................................................................... 1.3, 9.3.2, 10.3, 14.6 
TESTING  ................................................................................................................................. 2.5.2, 3.10 
Soils  ................................................................................................................................................. 1.3 
WALL, FOUNDATION  ..................................................................................................................... 6.1 
WALL, RETAINING  ......................................................................................................................... 7.1 
 
